Total pages: 792
=== PAGE 213 ===
3.1  •   I NTRODUCTION  AND TRANSPORT -LAYER SERVICES     185
the same way as Ann and Bill. Being younger kids, Susan and Harvey pick up and 
drop off the mail less frequently and occasionally lose letters (which are sometimes 
chewed up by the family dog). Thus, the cousin-pair Susan and Harvey do not pro-
vide the same set of services (that is, the same service model) as Ann and Bill. In 
an analogous manner, a computer network may make available multiple transport 
protocols, with each protocol offering a different service model to applications.
The possible services that Ann and Bill can provide are clearly constrained by 
the possible services that the postal service provides. For example, if the postal ser-
vice doesn’t provide a maximum bound on how long it can take to deliver mail 
between the two houses (for example, three days), then there is no way that Ann and 
Bill can guarantee a maximum delay for mail delivery between any of the cousin 
pairs. In a similar manner, the services that a transport protocol can provide are often 
constrained by the service model of the underlying network-layer protocol. If the 
network-layer protocol cannot provide delay or bandwidth guarantees for transport-
layer segments sent between hosts, then the transport-layer protocol cannot provide 
delay or bandwidth guarantees for application messages sent between processes.
Nevertheless, certain services can be offered by a transport protocol even when 
the underlying network protocol doesn’t offer the corresponding service at the net-
work layer. For example, as we’ll see in this chapter, a transport protocol can offer 
reliable data transfer service to an application even when the underlying network 
protocol is unreliable, that is, even when the network protocol loses, garbles, or 
duplicates packets. As another example (which we’ll explore in Chapter 8 when we 
discuss network security), a transport protocol can use encryption to guarantee that 
application messages are not read by intruders, even when the network layer cannot 
guarantee the confidentiality of transport-layer segments.
3.1.2 Overview of the Transport Layer in the Internet
Recall that the Internet makes two distinct transport-layer protocols available to the 
application layer. One of these protocols is UDP (User Datagram Protocol), which 
provides an unreliable, connectionless service to the invoking application. The sec-
ond of these protocols is TCP (Transmission Control Protocol), which provides a 
reliable, connection-oriented service to the invoking application. When designing a 
network application, the application developer must specify one of these two trans-
port protocols. As we saw in Section 2.7, the application developer selects between 
UDP and TCP when creating sockets.
To simplify terminology, we refer to the transport-layer packet as a segment. We 
mention, however, that the Internet literature (for example, the RFCs) also refers to the 
transport-layer packet for TCP as a segment but often refers to the packet for UDP as 
a datagram. However, this same Internet literature also uses the term datagram for the 
network-layer packet! For an introductory book on computer networking such as this, 
we believe that it is less confusing to refer to both TCP and UDP packets as segments, 
and reserve the term datagram for the network-layer packet.
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   185 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 214 ===
186     CHAPTER 3  •   TRANSPORT LAYER
Before proceeding with our brief introduction of UDP and TCP, it will be useful 
to say a few words about the Internet’s network layer. (We’ll learn about the network 
layer in detail in Chapters 4 and 5.) The Internet’s network-layer protocol has a 
name—IP, for Internet Protocol. IP provides logical communication between hosts. 
The IP service model is a best-effort delivery service. This means that IP makes 
its “best effort” to deliver segments between communicating hosts, but it makes no 
guarantees. In particular, it does not guarantee segment delivery, it does not guaran-
tee orderly delivery of segments, and it does not guarantee the integrity of the data 
in the segments. For these reasons, IP is said to be an unreliable service. We also 
mention here that every host has at least one network-layer address, a so-called IP 
address. We’ll examine IP addressing in detail in Chapter 4; for this chapter we need 
only keep in mind that each host has an IP address.
Having taken a glimpse at the IP service model, let’s now summarize the service 
models provided by UDP and TCP. The most fundamental responsibility of UDP 
and TCP is to extend IP’s delivery service between two end systems to a delivery 
service between two processes running on the end systems. Extending host-to-host 
delivery to process-to-process delivery is called transport-layer multiplexing and  
demultiplexing. We’ll discuss transport-layer multiplexing and demultiplexing in 
the next section. UDP and TCP also provide integrity checking by including error-
detection fields in their segments’ headers. These two minimal transport-layer 
services—process-to-process data delivery and error checking—are the only two 
services that UDP provides! In particular, like IP, UDP is an unreliable service—it 
does not guarantee that data sent by one process will arrive intact (or at all!) to the 
destination process. UDP is discussed in detail in Section 3.3.
TCP, on the other hand, offers several additional services to applications. First 
and foremost, it provides reliable data transfer. Using flow control, sequence 
numbers, acknowledgments, and timers (techniques we’ll explore in detail in this 
chapter), TCP ensures that data is delivered from sending process to receiving pro-
cess, correctly and in order. TCP thus converts IP’s unreliable service between end 
systems into a reliable data transport service between processes. TCP also provides 
congestion control. Congestion control is not so much a service provided to the 
invoking application as it is a service for the Internet as a whole, a service for the 
general good. Loosely speaking, TCP congestion control prevents any one TCP con-
nection from swamping the links and routers between communicating hosts with 
an excessive amount of traffic. TCP strives to give each connection traversing a 
congested link an equal share of the link bandwidth. This is done by regulating the 
rate at which the sending sides of TCP connections can send traffic into the network. 
UDP traffic, on the other hand, is unregulated. An application using UDP transport 
can send at any rate it pleases, for as long as it pleases.
A protocol that provides reliable data transfer and congestion control is neces-
sarily complex. We’ll need several sections to cover the principles of reliable data 
transfer and congestion control, and additional sections to cover the TCP protocol 
itself. These topics are investigated in Sections 3.4 through 3.7. The approach taken 
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   186 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 215 ===
3.2  •   MULTIPLE XING AND DEMULTIPLEXING     187
in this chapter is to alternate between basic principles and the TCP protocol. For 
example, we’ll first discuss reliable data transfer in a general setting and then discuss 
how TCP specifically provides reliable data transfer. Similarly, we’ll first discuss 
congestion control in a general setting and then discuss how TCP performs conges-
tion control. But before getting into all this good stuff, let’s first look at transport-
layer multiplexing and demultiplexing.
3.2  Multiplexing and Demultiplexing
In this section, we discuss transport-layer multiplexing and demultiplexing, that 
is, extending the host-to-host delivery service provided by the network layer to a  
process-to-process delivery service for applications running on the hosts. In order to 
keep the discussion concrete, we’ll discuss this basic transport-layer service in the 
context of the Internet. We emphasize, however, that a multiplexing/demultiplexing 
service is needed for all computer networks.
At the destination host, the transport layer receives segments from the network 
layer just below. The transport layer has the responsibility of delivering the data in 
these segments to the appropriate application process running in the host. Let’s take 
a look at an example. Suppose you are sitting in front of your computer, and you are 
downloading Web pages while running one FTP session and two Telnet sessions. 
You therefore have four network application processes running—two Telnet pro-
cesses, one FTP process, and one HTTP process. When the transport layer in your 
computer receives data from the network layer below, it needs to direct the received 
data to one of these four processes. Let’s now examine how this is done.
First recall from Section 2.7 that a process (as part of a network application) 
can have one or more sockets, doors through which data passes from the network to 
the process and through which data passes from the process to the network. Thus, 
as shown in Figure 3.2, the transport layer in the receiving host does not actually 
deliver data directly to a process, but instead to an intermediary socket. Because at 
any given time there can be more than one socket in the receiving host, each socket 
has a unique identifier. The format of the identifier depends on whether the socket is 
a UDP or a TCP socket, as we’ll discuss shortly.
Now let’s consider how a receiving host directs an incoming transport-layer 
segment to the appropriate socket. Each transport-layer segment has a set of fields in 
the segment for this purpose. At the receiving end, the transport layer examines these 
fields to identify the receiving socket and then directs the segment to that socket. 
This job of delivering the data in a transport-layer segment to the correct socket is 
called demultiplexing. The job of gathering data chunks at the source host from 
different sockets, encapsulating each data chunk with header information (that will 
later be used in demultiplexing) to create segments, and passing the segments to the 
network layer is called multiplexing. Note that the transport layer in the middle host 
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   187 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 216 ===
188     CHAPTER 3  •   TRANSPORT LAYER
in Figure 3.2 must demultiplex segments arriving from the network layer below to 
either process P1 or P2 above; this is done by directing the arriving segment’s data 
to/uni00A0the corresponding process’s socket. The transport layer in the middle host must 
also gather outgoing data from these sockets, form transport-layer segments, and 
pass these segments down to the network layer. Although we have introduced mul-
tiplexing and demultiplexing in the context of the Internet transport protocols, it’s 
important to realize that they are concerns whenever a single protocol at one layer (at 
the transport layer or elsewhere) is used by multiple protocols at the next higher layer.
To illustrate the demultiplexing job, recall the household analogy in the previous 
section. Each of the kids is identified by his or her name. When Bill receives a batch 
of mail from the mail carrier, he performs a demultiplexing operation by observing 
to whom the letters are addressed and then hand delivering the mail to his brothers 
and sisters. Ann performs a multiplexing operation when she collects letters from her 
brothers and sisters and gives the collected mail to the mail person.
Now that we understand the roles of transport-layer multiplexing and demulti-
plexing, let us examine how it is actually done in a host. From the discussion above, 
we know that transport-layer multiplexing requires (1) that sockets have unique 
identifiers, and (2) that each segment have special fields that indicate the socket to 
which the segment is to be delivered. These special fields, illustrated in Figure 3.3, 
are the source port number field and the destination port number field. (The UDP 
and TCP segments have other fields as well, as discussed in the subsequent sections 
of this chapter.) Each port number is a 16-bit number, ranging from 0 to 65535. 
The port numbers ranging from 0 to 1023 are called well-known port numbers   
and are restricted, which means that they are reserved for use by well-known 
Network
Key:
Process Socket
Data link
Physical
Transport
Application
Network
Application
Data link
Physical
Transport
Network
Data link
Physical
Transport
P3 P2P1 P4 Application
Figure 3.2 /uni2666 Transport-layer multiplexing and demultiplexing
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   188 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 217 ===
3.2  •   MULTIPLE XING AND DEMULTIPLEXING     189
application protocols such as HTTP (which uses port number 80) and FTP (which 
uses port number 21). The list of well-known port numbers is given in RFC 1700 
and is updated at http://www.iana.org [RFC 3232]. When we develop a new appli-
cation (such as the simple application developed in Section 2.7), we must assign the 
application a port number.
It should now be clear how the transport layer could implement the demultiplex-
ing service: Each socket in the host could be assigned a port number, and when 
a segment arrives at the host, the transport layer examines the destination port 
number in the segment and directs the segment to the corresponding socket. The 
segment’s data then passes through the socket into the attached process. As we’ll 
see, this is basically how UDP does it. However, we’ll also see that multiplexing/
demultiplexing in TCP is yet more subtle.
Connectionless Multiplexing and Demultiplexing
Recall from Section 2.7.1 that the Python program running in a host can create a 
UDP socket with the line
clientSocket = socket(AF_INET, SOCK_DGRAM)
When a UDP socket is created in this manner, the transport layer automatically 
assigns a port number to the socket. In particular, the transport layer assigns a port 
number in the range 1024 to 65535 that is currently not being used by any other UDP 
port in the host. Alternatively, we can add a line into our Python program after we 
create the socket to associate a specific port number (say, 19157) to this UDP socket 
via the socket bind() method:
clientSocket.bind((’’, 19157))
Source port #
32 bits
Dest. port #
Other header ﬁelds
Application
data
(message)
Figure 3.3 /uni2666  Source and destination port-number fields in a transport-layer 
segment
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   189 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 218 ===
190     CHAPTER 3  •   TRANSPORT LAYER
If the application developer writing the code were implementing the server side of 
a “well-known protocol,” then the developer would have to assign the correspond-
ing well-known port number. Typically, the client side of the application lets the 
transport layer automatically (and transparently) assign the port number, whereas the 
server side of the application assigns a specific port number.
With port numbers assigned to UDP sockets, we can now precisely describe 
UDP multiplexing/demultiplexing. Suppose a process in Host A, with UDP port 
19157, wants to send a chunk of application data to a process with UDP port 46428 in 
Host B. The transport layer in Host A creates a transport-layer segment that includes 
the application data, the source port number (19157), the destination port number 
(46428), and two other values (which will be discussed later, but are unimportant for 
the current discussion). The transport layer then passes the resulting segment to the 
network layer. The network layer encapsulates the segment in an IP datagram and 
makes a best-effort attempt to deliver the segment to the receiving host. If the seg-
ment arrives at the receiving Host B, the transport layer at the receiving host exam-
ines the destination port number in the segment (46428) and delivers the segment 
to its socket identified by port 46428. Note that Host B could be running multiple 
processes, each with its own UDP socket and associated port number. As UDP seg-
ments arrive from the network, Host B directs (demultiplexes) each segment to the 
appropriate socket by examining the segment’s destination port number.
It is important to note that a UDP socket is fully identified by a two-tuple consist-
ing of a destination IP address and a destination port number. As a consequence, if 
two UDP segments have different source IP addresses and/or source port numbers, but 
have the same destination IP address and destination port number, then the two seg-
ments will be directed to the same destination process via the same destination socket.
You may be wondering now, what is the purpose of the source port number? 
As shown in Figure 3.4, in the A-to-B segment the source port number serves as 
part of a “return address”—when B wants to send a segment back to A, the destina-
tion port in the B-to-A segment will take its value from the source port value of the 
A-to-B segment. (The complete return address is A’s IP address and the source port 
number.) As an example, recall the UDP server program studied in Section 2.7. In 
UDPServer.py, the server uses the recvfrom() method to extract the client-
side (source) port number from the segment it receives from the client; it then sends 
a new segment to the client, with the extracted source port number serving as the 
destination port number in this new segment.
Connection-Oriented Multiplexing and Demultiplexing
In order to understand TCP demultiplexing, we have to take a close look at TCP 
sockets and TCP connection establishment. One subtle difference between a 
TCP socket and a UDP socket is that a TCP socket is identified by a four-tuple: 
(source IP address, source port number, destination IP address, destination port 
number). Thus, when a TCP segment arrives from the network to a host, the host 
uses all four values to direct (demultiplex) the segment to the appropriate socket.  
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   190 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 219 ===
3.2  •   MULTIPLE XING AND DEMULTIPLEXING     191
In particular, and in contrast with UDP, two arriving TCP segments with differ-
ent source IP addresses or source port numbers will (with the exception of a TCP 
segment carrying the original connection-establishment request) be directed to two 
different sockets. To gain further insight, let’s reconsider the TCP client-server pro-
gramming example in Section 2.7.2:
• The TCP server application has a “welcoming socket,” that waits for connection-
establishment requests from TCP clients (see Figure 2.29) on port number 12000.
• The TCP client creates a socket and sends a connection establishment request 
segment with the lines:
 clientSocket = socket(AF_INET, SOCK_STREAM)
 clientSocket.connect((serverName,12000))
• A connection-establishment request is nothing more than a TCP segment with 
destination port number 12000 and a special connection-establishment bit set in 
the TCP header (discussed in Section 3.5). The segment also includes a source 
port number that was chosen by the client.
• When the host operating system of the computer running the server process 
receives the incoming connection-request segment with destination port 12000, 
it locates the server process that is waiting to accept a connection on port number 
12000. The server process then creates a new socket:
 connectionSocket, addr = serverSocket.accept()
Host A
Client process
Socket
Server B
source port:
19157
dest. port:
46428
source port:
46428
dest. port:
19157
Figure 3.4 /uni2666 The inversion of source and destination port numbers
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   191 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 220 ===
192     CHAPTER 3  •   TRANSPORT LAYER
• Also, the transport layer at the server notes the following four values in the con-
nection-request segment: (1) the source port number in the segment, (2) the IP 
address of the source host, (3) the destination port number in the segment, and 
(4) its own IP address. The newly created connection socket is identified by these 
four values; all subsequently arriving segments whose source port, source IP 
address, destination port, and destination IP address match these four values will 
be demultiplexed to this socket. With the TCP connection now in place, the client 
and server can now send data to each other.
The server host may support many simultaneous TCP connection sockets, with 
each socket attached to a process, and with each socket identified by its own four-
tuple. When a TCP segment arrives at the host, all four fields (source IP address, 
source port, destination IP address, destination port) are used to direct (demultiplex) 
the segment to the appropriate socket.
PORT SCANNING
We’ve seen that a server process waits patiently on an open port for contact by a 
remote client. Some ports are reserved for well-known applications (e.g., Web, FTP, 
DNS, and SMTP servers); other ports are used by convention by popular applications 
(e.g., the Microsoft Windows SQL server listens for requests on UDP port 1434). Thus, 
if we determine that a port is open on a host, we may be able to map that port to a 
specific application running on the host. This is very useful for system administrators, 
who are often interested in knowing which network applications are running on the 
hosts in their networks. But attackers, in order to “case the joint,” also want to know 
which ports are open on target hosts. If a host is found to be running an application 
with a known security flaw (e.g., a SQL server listening on port 1434 was subject to 
a buffer overflow, allowing a remote user to execute arbitrary code on the vulnerable 
host, a flaw exploited by the Slammer worm [CERT 2003–04]), then that host is ripe 
for attack.
Determining which applications are listening on which ports is a relatively easy 
task. Indeed there are a number of public domain programs, called port scanners, 
that do just that. Perhaps the most widely used of these is nmap, freely available at 
http://nmap.org and included in most Linux distributions. For TCP, nmap sequentially 
scans ports, looking for ports that are accepting TCP connections. For UDP, nmap 
again sequentially scans ports, looking for UDP ports that respond to transmitted UDP 
segments. In both cases, nmap returns a list of open, closed, or unreachable ports. 
A host running nmap can attempt to scan any target host anywhere in the Internet. 
We’ll revisit nmap in Section 3.5.6, when we discuss TCP connection management.
FOCUS ON SECURITY
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   192 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 221 ===
3.2  •   MULTIPLE XING AND DEMULTIPLEXING     193
The situation is illustrated in Figure 3.5, in which Host C initiates two HTTP 
sessions to server B, and Host A initiates one HTTP session to B. Hosts A and C 
and server B each have their own unique IP address—A, C, and B, respectively. 
Host C assigns two different source port numbers (26145 and 7532) to its two HTTP 
connections. Because Host A is choosing source port numbers independently of C, 
it might also assign a source port of 26145 to its HTTP connection. But this is not 
a problem—server B will still be able to correctly demultiplex the two connections 
having the same source port number, since the two connections have different source 
IP addresses.
Web Servers and TCP
Before closing this discussion, it’s instructive to say a few additional words about 
Web servers and how they use port numbers. Consider a host running a Web server, 
such as an Apache Web server, on port 80. When clients (for example, browsers) 
send segments to the server, all segments will have destination port 80. In particular, 
both the initial connection-establishment segments and the segments carrying HTTP 
source port:
7532
dest. port:
80
source IP:
C
dest. IP:
B
source port:
26145
dest. port:
80
source IP:
C
dest. IP:
B
source port:
26145
dest. port:
80
source IP:
A
dest. IP:
B
Per-connection
HTTP
processes
Transport-
layer
demultiplexing
Web 
server B
Web client
host C
Web client
host A
Figure 3.5 /uni2666  Two clients, using the same destination port number (80) to 
communicate with the same Web server application
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   193 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 222 ===
194     CHAPTER 3  •   TRANSPORT LAYER
request messages will have destination port 80. As we have just described, the server 
distinguishes the segments from the different clients using source IP addresses and 
source port numbers.
Figure 3.5 shows a Web server that spawns a new process for each connec-
tion. As shown in Figure 3.5, each of these processes has its own connection socket 
through which HTTP requests arrive and HTTP responses are sent. We mention, 
however, that there is not always a one-to-one correspondence between connection 
sockets and processes. In fact, today’s high-performing Web servers often use only 
one process, and create a new thread with a new connection socket for each new 
client connection. (A thread can be viewed as a lightweight subprocess.) If you did 
the first programming assignment in Chapter 2, you built a Web server that does just 
this. For such a server, at any given time there may be many connection sockets (with 
different identifiers) attached to the same process.
If the client and server are using persistent HTTP, then throughout the duration 
of the persistent connection the client and server exchange HTTP messages via the 
same server socket. However, if the client and server use non-persistent HTTP, then 
a new TCP connection is created and closed for every request/response, and hence 
a new socket is created and later closed for every request/response. This frequent 
creating and closing of sockets can severely impact the performance of a busy Web 
server (although a number of operating system tricks can be used to mitigate the 
problem). Readers interested in the operating system issues surrounding persistent 
and non-persistent HTTP are encouraged to see [Nielsen 1997; Nahum 2002].
Now that we’ve discussed transport-layer multiplexing and demultiplexing, let’s 
move on and discuss one of the Internet’s transport protocols, UDP. In the next sec-
tion, we’ll see that UDP adds little more to the network-layer protocol than a multi-
plexing/demultiplexing service.
3.3  Connectionless Transport: UDP
In this section, we’ll take a close look at UDP, how it works, and what it does. 
We encourage you to refer back to Section 2.1, which includes an overview of the 
UDP service model, and to Section 2.7.1, which discusses socket programming using 
UDP.
To motivate our discussion about UDP, suppose you were interested in design-
ing a no-frills, bare-bones transport protocol. How might you go about doing this? 
You might first consider using a vacuous transport protocol. In particular, on the 
sending side, you might consider taking the messages from the application process 
and passing them directly to the network layer; and on the receiving side, you might 
consider taking the messages arriving from the network layer and passing them 
directly to the application process. But as we learned in the previous section, we have 
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   194 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 223 ===
3.3  •   CONNECTIONLESS T RANSPORT: UDP     195
to do a little more than nothing! At the very least, the transport layer has to provide a 
multiplexing/demultiplexing service in order to pass data between the network layer 
and the correct application-level process.
UDP, defined in [RFC 768], does just about as little as a transport protocol can do. 
Aside from the multiplexing/demultiplexing function and some light error checking, it 
adds nothing to IP. In fact, if the application developer chooses UDP instead of TCP, 
then the application is almost directly talking with IP. UDP takes messages from the 
application process, attaches source and destination port number fields for the multi-
plexing/demultiplexing service, adds two other small fields, and passes the resulting 
segment to the network layer. The network layer encapsulates the transport-layer seg-
ment into an IP datagram and then makes a best-effort attempt to deliver the segment 
to the receiving host. If the segment arrives at the receiving host, UDP uses the destina-
tion port number to deliver the segment’s data to the correct application process. Note 
that with UDP there is no handshaking between sending and receiving transport-layer 
entities before sending a segment. For this reason, UDP is said to be connectionless.
DNS is an example of an application-layer protocol that typically uses UDP. 
When the DNS application in a host wants to make a query, it constructs a DNS query 
message and passes the message to UDP. Without performing any handshaking with 
the UDP entity running on the destination end system, the host-side UDP adds header 
fields to the message and passes the resulting segment to the network layer. The net-
work layer encapsulates the UDP segment into a datagram and sends the datagram to 
a name server. The DNS application at the querying host then waits for a reply to its 
query. If it doesn’t receive a reply (possibly because the underlying network lost the 
query or the reply), it might try resending the query, try sending the query to another 
name server, or inform the invoking application that it can’t get a reply.
Now you might be wondering why an application developer would ever choose 
to build an application over UDP rather than over TCP. Isn’t TCP always preferable, 
since TCP provides a reliable data transfer service, while UDP does not? The answer 
is no, as some applications are better suited for UDP for the following reasons:
• Finer application-level control over what data is sent, and when. Under UDP, as 
soon as an application process passes data to UDP, UDP will package the data 
inside a UDP segment and immediately pass the segment to the network layer. 
TCP, on the other hand, has a congestion-control mechanism that throttles the 
transport-layer TCP sender when one or more links between the source and des-
tination hosts become excessively congested. TCP will also continue to resend a 
segment until the receipt of the segment has been acknowledged by the destina-
tion, regardless of how long reliable delivery takes. Since real-time applications 
often require a minimum sending rate, do not want to overly delay segment trans-
mission, and can tolerate some data loss, TCP’s service model is not particularly 
well matched to these applications’ needs. As discussed below, these applications 
can use UDP and implement, as part of the application, any additional functional-
ity that is needed beyond UDP’s no-frills segment-delivery service.
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   195 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 224 ===
196     CHAPTER 3  •   TRANSPORT LAYER
• No connection establishment. As we’ll discuss later, TCP uses a three-way hand-
shake before it starts to transfer data. UDP just blasts away without any formal 
preliminaries. Thus UDP does not introduce any delay to establish a connection. 
This is probably the principal reason why DNS runs over UDP rather than TCP—
DNS would be much slower if it ran over TCP. HTTP uses TCP rather than UDP, 
since reliability is critical for Web pages with text. But, as we briefly discussed 
in Section 2.2, the TCP connection-establishment delay in HTTP is an important 
contributor to the delays associated with downloading Web documents. Indeed, 
the QUIC protocol (Quick UDP Internet Connection, [IETF QUIC 2020]), used 
in Google’s Chrome browser, uses UDP as its underlying transport protocol and 
implements reliability in an application-layer protocol on top of UDP. We’ll take 
a closer look at QUIC in Section 3.8.
• No connection state. TCP maintains connection state in the end systems. This 
connection state includes receive and send buffers, congestion-control param-
eters, and sequence and acknowledgment number parameters. We will see in  
Section 3.5 that this state information is needed to implement TCP’s reliable data 
transfer service and to provide congestion control. UDP, on the other hand, does 
not maintain connection state and does not track any of these parameters. For this 
reason, a server devoted to a particular application can typically support many 
more active clients when the application runs over UDP rather than TCP.
• Small packet header overhead. The TCP segment has 20 bytes of header over-
head in every segment, whereas UDP has only 8 bytes of overhead.
Figure 3.6 lists popular Internet applications and the transport protocols that 
they use. As we expect, e-mail, remote terminal access, and file transfer run over 
TCP—all these applications need the reliable data transfer service of TCP. We 
learned in Chapter 2 that early versions of HTTP ran over TCP but that more recent 
versions of HTTP run over UDP, providing their own error control and congestion 
control (among other services) at the application layer. Nevertheless, many important 
applications run over UDP rather than TCP. For example, UDP is used to carry network 
management (SNMP; see Section 5.7) data. UDP is preferred to TCP in this case, 
since network management applications must often run when the network is in a 
stressed state—precisely when reliable, congestion-controlled data transfer is diffi-
cult to achieve. Also, as we mentioned earlier, DNS runs over UDP, thereby avoiding 
TCP’s connection-establishment delays.
As shown in Figure 3.6, both UDP and TCP are sometimes used today with 
multimedia applications, such as Internet phone, real-time video conferencing, and 
streaming of stored audio and video. We just mention now that all of these applica-
tions can tolerate a small amount of packet loss, so that reliable data transfer is not 
absolutely critical for the application’s success. Furthermore, real-time applications, 
like Internet phone and video conferencing, react very poorly to TCP’s congestion 
control. For these reasons, developers of multimedia applications may choose to run 
their applications over UDP instead of TCP. When packet loss rates are low, and 
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   196 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 225 ===
3.3  •   CONNECTIONLESS T RANSPORT: UDP     197
with some organizations blocking UDP traffic for security reasons (see Chapter 8), 
TCP becomes an increasingly attractive protocol for streaming media transport.
Although commonly done today, running multimedia applications over UDP 
needs to be done with care. As we mentioned above, UDP has no congestion control. 
But congestion control is needed to prevent the network from entering a congested 
state in which very little useful work is done. If everyone were to start streaming 
high-bit-rate video without using any congestion control, there would be so much 
packet overflow at routers that very few UDP packets would successfully traverse the 
source-to-destination path. Moreover, the high loss rates induced by the uncontrolled 
UDP senders would cause the TCP senders (which, as we’ll see, do decrease their 
sending rates in the face of congestion) to dramatically decrease their rates. Thus, the 
lack of congestion control in UDP can result in high loss rates between a UDP sender 
and receiver, and the crowding out of TCP sessions. Many researchers have proposed 
new mechanisms to force all sources, including UDP sources, to perform adaptive 
congestion control [Mahdavi 1997; Floyd 2000; Kohler 2006: RFC 4340].
Before discussing the UDP segment structure, we mention that it is  possible 
for an application to have reliable data transfer when using UDP. This can be done 
if reliability is built into the application itself (for example, by adding acknowl -
edgment and retransmission mechanisms, such as those we’ll study in the next 
section). We mentioned earlier that the QUIC protocol implements reliability 
in an application-layer protocol on top of UDP. But this is a nontrivial task that 
would keep an application developer busy debugging for a long time. Neverthe-
less,  building reliability directly into the application allows the application to “have 
Electronic mail
Remote terminal access
Secure remote terminal access
Web
File transfer
Remote ﬁle server
Streaming multimedia
Internet telephony
Network management
Name translation
SMTP
Telnet
SSH
HTTP, HTTP/3
FTP
NFS
DASH
typically proprietary
SNMP
DNS
TCP
TCP
TCP
TCP (for HTTP), UDP (for HTTP/3) 
TCP
Typically UDP
TCP
UDP or TCP
Typically UDP
Typically UDP
Application
Application-Layer
Protocol
Underlying Transport
Protocol
Figure 3.6 /uni2666  Popular Internet applications and their underlying transport  
protocols
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   197 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 226 ===
198     CHAPTER 3  •   TRANSPORT LAYER
its cake and eat it too.” That is, application processes can communicate reliably 
without being subjected to the transmission-rate constraints imposed by TCP’s 
congestion-control mechanism.
3.3.1 UDP Segment Structure
The UDP segment structure, shown in Figure 3.7, is defined in RFC 768. The applica-
tion data occupies the data field of the UDP segment. For example, for DNS, the data 
field contains either a query message or a response message. For a streaming audio 
application, audio samples fill the data field. The UDP header has only four fields, 
each consisting of two bytes. As discussed in the previous section, the port numbers 
allow the destination host to pass the application data to the correct process run-
ning on the destination end system (that is, to perform the demultiplexing function).  
The length field specifies the number of bytes in the UDP segment (header plus 
data). An explicit length value is needed since the size of the data field may differ 
from one UDP segment to the next. The checksum is used by the receiving host to 
check whether errors have been introduced into the segment. In truth, the check-
sum is also calculated over a few of the fields in the IP header in addition to the 
UDP segment. But we ignore this detail in order to see the forest through the trees. 
We’ll discuss the checksum calculation below. Basic principles of error detection are 
described in Section 6.2. The length field specifies the length of the UDP segment, 
including the header, in bytes.
3.3.2 UDP Checksum
The UDP checksum provides for error detection. That is, the checksum is used to 
determine whether bits within the UDP segment have been altered (for example, by 
noise in the links or while stored in a router) as it moved from source to destination. 
Source port #
32 bits
Dest. port #
Length Checksum
Application
data
(message)
Figure 3.7 /uni2666 UDP segment structure
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   198 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 227 ===
3.3  •   CONNECTIONLESS T RANSPORT: UDP     199
UDP at the sender side performs the 1s complement of the sum of all the 16-bit 
words in the segment, with any overflow encountered during the sum being wrapped 
around. This result is put in the checksum field of the UDP segment. Here we give 
a simple example of the checksum calculation. You can find details about efficient 
implementation of the calculation in RFC 1071 and performance over real data in 
[Stone 1998; Stone 2000]. As an example, suppose that we have the following three 
16-bit words:
0110011001100000
0101010101010101
1000111100001100
The sum of first two of these 16-bit words is
0110011001100000
0101010101010101
1011101110110101
Adding the third word to the above sum gives
1011101110110101
1000111100001100
0100101011000010
Note that this last addition had overflow, which was wrapped around. The 1s 
complement is obtained by converting all the 0s to 1s and converting all the 1s to 
0s. Thus, the 1s complement of the sum 0100101011000010 is 1011010100111101, 
which becomes the checksum. At the receiver, all four 16-bit words are added, 
including the checksum. If no errors are introduced into the packet, then clearly the 
sum at the receiver will be 1111111111111111. If one of the bits is a 0, then we know 
that errors have been introduced into the packet.
You may wonder why UDP provides a checksum in the first place, as many 
link-layer protocols (including the popular Ethernet protocol) also provide error 
checking. The reason is that there is no guarantee that all the links between source 
and destination provide error checking; that is, one of the links may use a link-layer 
protocol that does not provide error checking. Furthermore, even if segments are 
correctly transferred across a link, it’s possible that bit errors could be introduced 
when a segment is stored in a router’s memory. Given that neither link-by-link reli-
ability nor in-memory error detection is guaranteed, UDP must provide error detec-
tion at the transport layer, on an end-end basis, if the end-end data transfer service 
is to provide error detection. This is an example of the celebrated end-end principle 
in system design [Saltzer 1984], which states that since certain functionality (error 
detection, in this case) must be implemented on an end-end basis: “functions placed 
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   199 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 228 ===
200     CHAPTER 3  •   TRANSPORT LAYER
at the lower levels may be redundant or of little value when compared to the cost of 
providing them at the higher level.”
Because IP is supposed to run over just about any layer-2 protocol, it is useful 
for the transport layer to provide error checking as a safety measure. Although UDP 
provides error checking, it does not do anything to recover from an error. Some 
implementations of UDP simply discard the damaged segment; others pass the dam-
aged segment to the application with a warning.
That wraps up our discussion of UDP. We will soon see that TCP offers reli-
able data transfer to its applications as well as other services that UDP doesn’t offer. 
Naturally, TCP is also more complex than UDP. Before discussing TCP, however, 
it will be useful to step back and first discuss the underlying principles of reliable 
data transfer.
3.4  Principles of Reliable Data Transfer
In this section, we consider the problem of reliable data transfer in a general context. 
This is appropriate since the problem of implementing reliable data transfer occurs 
not only at the transport layer, but also at the link layer and the application layer 
as well. The general problem is thus of central importance to networking. Indeed, 
if one had to identify a “top-ten” list of fundamentally important problems in all 
of networking, this would be a candidate to lead the list. In the next section, we’ll 
examine TCP and show, in particular, that TCP exploits many of the principles that 
we are about to describe.
Figure 3.8 illustrates the framework for our study of reliable data transfer. The 
service abstraction provided to the upper-layer entities is that of a reliable channel 
through which data can be transferred. With a reliable channel, no transferred data 
bits are corrupted (flipped from 0 to 1, or vice versa) or lost, and all are delivered in 
the order in which they were sent. This is precisely the service model offered by TCP 
to the Internet applications that invoke it.
It is the responsibility of a reliable data transfer protocol to implement this 
service abstraction. This task is made difficult by the fact that the layer below the 
reliable data transfer protocol may be unreliable. For example, TCP is a reliable data 
transfer protocol that is implemented on top of an unreliable (IP) end-to-end network 
layer. More generally, the layer beneath the two reliably communicating end points 
might consist of a single physical link (as in the case of a link-level data transfer 
protocol) or a global internetwork (as in the case of a transport-level protocol). For 
our purposes, however, we can view this lower layer simply as an unreliable point-
to-point channel.
In this section, we will incrementally develop the sender and receiver sides of 
a reliable data transfer protocol, considering increasingly complex models of the 
underlying channel. For example, we’ll consider what protocol mechanisms are 
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   200 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 229 ===
3.4  •   P RINCIPLES OF RELIAB LE DATA TRANSFER     201
needed when the underlying channel can corrupt bits or lose entire packets. One 
assumption we’ll adopt throughout our discussion here is that packets will be deliv-
ered in the order in which they were sent, with some packets possibly being lost; 
that is, the underlying channel will not reorder packets. Figure 3.8(b) illustrates the 
interfaces for our data transfer protocol. The sending side of the data transfer proto-
col will be invoked from above by a call to rdt_send(). It will pass the data to be 
delivered to the upper layer at the receiving side. (Here rdt stands for reliable data 
transfer protocol and _send indicates that the sending side of rdt is being called. 
The first step in developing any protocol is to choose a good name!) On the receiving 
side, rdt_rcv() will be called when a packet arrives from the receiving side of the 
channel. When the rdt protocol wants to deliver data to the upper layer, it will do so 
by calling deliver_data(). In the following, we use the terminology “packet” 
rather than transport-layer “segment.” Because the theory developed in this section 
Reliable channel
Unreliable channel
rdt_send()
udt_send()
Sending
process
Receiver
process
deliver_data()
Application
layer
Transport
layer
a. Provided service
Network
layer
Key:
Data Packet
b. Service implementation
Reliable data
transfer protocol
(sending side)
Reliable data
transfer protocol
(receiving side)
rdt_rcv()
Figure 3.8 /uni2666  Reliable data transfer: Service model and service  
implementation
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   201 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 230 ===
202     CHAPTER 3  •   TRANSPORT LAYER
applies to computer networks in general and not just to the Internet transport layer, 
the generic term “packet” is perhaps more appropriate here.
In this section, we consider only the case of unidirectional data transfer, that is, 
data transfer from the sending to the receiving side. The case of reliable bidirectional 
(that is, full-duplex) data transfer is conceptually no more difficult but considerably 
more tedious to explain. Although we consider only unidirectional data transfer, it is 
important to note that the sending and receiving sides of our protocol will nonetheless 
need to transmit packets in both directions, as indicated in Figure 3.8. We will see 
shortly that, in addition to exchanging packets containing the data to be transferred, 
the sending and receiving sides of rdt will also need to exchange control packets 
back and forth. Both the send and receive sides of rdt send packets to the other side 
by a call to udt_send() (where udt stands for unreliable data transfer).
3.4.1 Building a Reliable Data Transfer Protocol
We now step through a series of protocols, each one becoming more complex, arriv-
ing at a flawless, reliable data transfer protocol.
Reliable Data Transfer over a Perfectly Reliable Channel: rdt1.0
We first consider the simplest case, in which the underlying channel is completely 
reliable. The protocol itself, which we’ll call rdt1.0, is trivial. The finite-state 
machine (FSM)  d e f i n i t i o n s  f o r  t h e  rdt1.0 sender and receiver are shown in 
Figure 3.9. The FSM in Figure 3.9(a) defines the operation of the sender, while 
the FSM in Figure 3.9(b) defines the operation of the receiver. It is important to 
note that there are separate FSMs for the sender and for the receiver. The sender 
and receiver FSMs in Figure 3.9 each have just one state. The arrows in the FSM 
description indicate the transition of the protocol from one state to another. (Since 
each FSM in Figure 3.9 has just one state, a transition is necessarily from the one 
state back to itself; we’ll see more complicated state diagrams shortly.) The event 
causing the transition is shown above the horizontal line labeling the transition, and 
the actions taken when the event occurs are shown below the horizontal line. When 
no action is taken on an event, or no event occurs and an action is taken, we’ll use 
the symbol 
/uni039B below or above the horizontal, respectively, to explicitly denote the 
lack of an action or event. The initial state of the FSM is indicated by the dashed 
arrow. Although the FSMs in Figure 3.9 have but one state, the FSMs we will see 
shortly have multiple states, so it will be important to identify the initial state of 
each FSM.
The sending side of rdt simply accepts data from the upper layer via the 
rdt_send(data) event, creates a packet containing the data (via the action 
make_pkt(data)) and sends the packet into the channel. In practice, the  
rdt_send(data) event would result from a procedure call (for example, to 
rdt_send()) by the upper-layer application.
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   202 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 231 ===
3.4  •   P RINCIPLES OF RELIAB LE DATA TRANSFER     203
On the receiving side, rdt receives a packet from the underlying channel via 
the rdt_rcv(packet) event, removes the data from the packet (via the action 
extract (packet, data)) and passes the data up to the upper layer (via 
the action deliver_data(data)). In practice, the rdt_rcv(packet) event 
would result from a procedure call (for example, to rdt_rcv()) from the lower-
layer protocol.
In this simple protocol, there is no difference between a unit of data and a packet. 
Also, all packet flow is from the sender to receiver; with a perfectly reliable chan-
nel there is no need for the receiver side to provide any feedback to the sender since 
nothing can go wrong! Note that we have also assumed that the receiver is able to 
receive data as fast as the sender happens to send data. Thus, there is no need for the 
receiver to ask the sender to slow down!
Reliable Data Transfer over a Channel with Bit Errors: rdt2.0
A more realistic model of the underlying channel is one in which bits in a packet may 
be corrupted. Such bit errors typically occur in the physical components of a network 
as a packet is transmitted, propagates, or is buffered. We’ll continue to assume for 
the moment that all transmitted packets are received (although their bits may be cor-
rupted) in the order in which they were sent.
Before developing a protocol for reliably communicating over such a channel, 
first consider how people might deal with such a situation. Consider how you yourself 
Wait for
call from
above
a.  rdt1.0: sending side
rdt_send(data)
packet=make_pkt(data)
udt_send(packet)
Wait for
call from
below
b.  rdt1.0: receiving side
rdt_rcv(packet)
extract(packet,data)
deliver_data(data)
Figure 3.9 /uni2666 rdt1.0—A protocol for a completely reliable channel
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   203 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 232 ===
204     CHAPTER 3  •   TRANSPORT LAYER
might dictate a long message over the phone. In a typical scenario, the message taker 
might say “OK” after each sentence has been heard, understood, and recorded. If the 
message taker hears a garbled sentence, you’re asked to repeat the garbled sentence. 
This message-dictation protocol uses both positive acknowledgments (“OK”) and 
negative acknowledgments (“Please repeat that.”). These control messages allow 
the receiver to let the sender know what has been received correctly, and what has 
been received in error and thus requires repeating. In a computer network setting, 
reliable data transfer protocols based on such retransmission are known as ARQ 
(Automatic Repeat reQuest) protocols.
Fundamentally, three additional protocol capabilities are required in ARQ pro-
tocols to handle the presence of bit errors:
• Error detection. First, a mechanism is needed to allow the receiver to detect when 
bit errors have occurred. Recall from the previous section that UDP uses the Inter-
net checksum field for exactly this purpose. In Chapter 6, we’ll examine error-
detection and -correction techniques in greater detail; these techniques allow the 
receiver to detect and possibly correct packet bit errors. For now, we need only 
know that these techniques require that extra bits (beyond the bits of original data 
to be transferred) be sent from the sender to the receiver; these bits will be gath-
ered into the packet checksum field of the rdt2.0 data packet.
• Receiver feedback. Since the sender and receiver are typically executing on dif-
ferent end systems, possibly separated by thousands of miles, the only way for 
the sender to learn of the receiver’s view of the world (in this case, whether or not 
a packet was received correctly) is for the receiver to provide explicit feedback 
to the sender. The positive (ACK) and negative (NAK) acknowledgment replies 
in the message-dictation scenario are examples of such feedback. Our rdt2.0 
protocol will similarly send ACK and NAK packets back from the receiver to 
the sender. In principle, these packets need only be one bit long; for example, a 0 
value could indicate a NAK and a value of 1 could indicate an ACK.
• Retransmission. A packet that is received in error at the receiver will be retrans-
mitted by the sender.
Figure 3.10 shows the FSM representation of rdt2.0, a data transfer 
protocol employing error detection, positive acknowledgments, and negative 
acknowledgments.
The send side of rdt2.0 has two states. In the leftmost state, the send-side 
protocol is waiting for data to be passed down from the upper layer. When the 
rdt_send(data) event occurs, the sender will create a packet (sndpkt) con-
taining the data to be sent, along with a packet checksum (for example, as discussed 
in Section 3.3.2 for the case of a UDP segment), and then send the packet via the 
udt_send(sndpkt) operation. In the rightmost state, the sender protocol is wait-
ing for an ACK or a NAK packet from the receiver. If an ACK packet is received 
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   204 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 233 ===
3.4  •   P RINCIPLES OF RELIAB LE DATA TRANSFER     205
(the notation rdt_rcv(rcvpkt) && isACK(rcvpkt) in Figure 3.10 cor-
responds to this event), the sender knows that the most recently transmitted packet 
has been received correctly and thus the protocol returns to the state of waiting for 
data from the upper layer. If a NAK is received, the protocol retransmits the last 
packet and waits for an ACK or NAK to be returned by the receiver in response to 
the retransmitted data packet. It is important to note that when the sender is in the 
wait-for-ACK-or-NAK state, it cannot get more data from the upper layer; that is, the 
rdt_send() event can not occur; that will happen only after the sender receives 
an ACK and leaves this state. Thus, the sender will not send a new piece of data until 
it is sure that the receiver has correctly received the current packet. Because of this 
behavior, protocols such as rdt2.0 are known as stop-and-wait protocols.
Wait for
call from
above
a.  rdt2.0: sending side
b.  rdt2.0: receiving side
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt) && corrupt(rcvpkt)
sndpkt=make_pkt(NAK)
udt_send(sndpkt)
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt) && isNAK(rcvpkt)
udt_send(sndpkt)
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt) && isACK(rcvpkt)
L
rdt_send(data)
sndpkt=make_pkt(data,checksum)
udt_send(sndpkt)
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt) && notcorrupt(rcvpkt)
extract(rcvpkt,data)
deliver_data(data)
sndpkt=make_pkt(ACK)
udt_send(sndpkt)
Wait for
call from
below
Wait for
ACK or
NAK
Figure 3.10 /uni2666 rdt2.0—A protocol for a channel with bit errors
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   205 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 234 ===
206     CHAPTER 3  •   TRANSPORT LAYER
The receiver-side FSM for rdt2.0 still has a single state. On packet arrival, 
the receiver replies with either an ACK or a NAK, depending on whether or not the 
received packet is corrupted. In Figure 3.10, the notation rdt_rcv(rcvpkt) && 
corrupt(rcvpkt) corresponds to the event in which a packet is received and is 
found to be in error.
Protocol rdt2.0 may look as if it works but, unfortunately, it has a fatal flaw. 
In particular, we haven’t accounted for the possibility that the ACK or NAK packet 
could be corrupted! (Before proceeding on, you should think about how this prob-
lem may be fixed.) Unfortunately, our slight oversight is not as innocuous as it may 
seem. Minimally, we will need to add checksum bits to ACK/NAK packets in order 
to detect such errors. The more difficult question is how the protocol should recover 
from errors in ACK or NAK packets. The difficulty here is that if an ACK or NAK 
is corrupted, the sender has no way of knowing whether or not the receiver has cor-
rectly received the last piece of transmitted data.
Consider three possibilities for handling corrupted ACKs or NAKs:
• For the first possibility, consider what a human might do in the message-dictation 
scenario. If the speaker didn’t understand the “OK” or “Please repeat that” reply 
from the receiver, the speaker would probably ask, “What did you say?” (thus 
introducing a new type of sender-to-receiver packet to our protocol). The receiver 
would then repeat the reply. But what if the speaker’s “What did you say?” is cor-
rupted? The receiver, having no idea whether the garbled sentence was part of the 
dictation or a request to repeat the last reply, would probably then respond with 
“What did you say?” And then, of course, that response might be garbled. Clearly, 
we’re heading down a difficult path.
• A second alternative is to add enough checksum bits to allow the sender not only 
to detect, but also to recover from, bit errors. This solves the immediate problem 
for a channel that can corrupt packets but not lose them.
• A third approach is for the sender simply to resend the current data packet when 
it receives a garbled ACK or NAK packet. This approach, however, introduces 
duplicate packets into the sender-to-receiver channel. The fundamental diffi-
culty with duplicate packets is that the receiver doesn’t know whether the ACK 
or NAK it last sent was received correctly at the sender. Thus, it cannot know a 
priori whether an arriving packet contains new data or is a retransmission!
A simple solution to this new problem (and one adopted in almost all exist-
ing data transfer protocols, including TCP) is to add a new field to the data packet 
and have the sender number its data packets by putting a sequence number into 
this field. The receiver then need only check this sequence number to determine 
whether or not the received packet is a retransmission. For this simple case of a 
stop-and-wait protocol, a 1-bit sequence number will suffice, since it will allow the 
receiver to know whether the sender is resending the previously transmitted packet 
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   206 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 235 ===
3.4  •   P RINCIPLES OF RELIAB LE DATA TRANSFER     207
(the sequence number of the received packet has the same sequence number as the 
most recently received packet) or a new packet (the sequence number changes, mov-
ing “forward” in modulo-2 arithmetic). Since we are currently assuming a channel 
that does not lose packets, ACK and NAK packets do not themselves need to indicate 
the sequence number of the packet they are acknowledging. The sender knows that a 
received ACK or NAK packet (whether garbled or not) was generated in response to 
its most recently transmitted data packet.
Figures 3.11 and 3.12 show the FSM description for rdt2.1, our fixed version 
of rdt2.0. The rdt2.1 sender and receiver FSMs each now have twice as many 
states as before. This is because the protocol state must now reflect whether the 
packet currently being sent (by the sender) or expected (at the receiver) should have a 
sequence number of 0 or 1. Note that the actions in those states where a 0-numbered 
packet is being sent or expected are mirror images of those where a 1-numbered 
packet is being sent or expected; the only differences have to do with the handling 
of the sequence number.
Protocol rdt2.1 uses both positive and negative acknowledgments from the 
receiver to the sender. When an out-of-order packet is received, the receiver sends 
a positive acknowledgment for the packet it has received. When a corrupted packet 
Wait for
call 0 from
above
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt)&&
(corrupt(rcvpkt)||
isNAK(rcvpkt))
udt_send(sndpkt)
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt)&&
(corrupt(rcvpkt)||
isNAK(rcvpkt))
udt_send(sndpkt)
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt)
&& notcorrupt(rcvpkt)
&& isACK(rcvpkt)
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt)
&& notcorrupt(rcvpkt)
&& isACK(rcvpkt)
L L
rdt_send(data)
sndpkt=make_pkt(0,data,checksum)
udt_send(sndpkt)
rdt_send(data)
sndpkt=make_pkt(1,data,checksum)
udt_send(sndpkt)
Wait for
ACK or
NAK 0
Wait for
ACK or
NAK 1
Wait for
call 1 from
above
Figure 3.11 /uni2666 rdt2.1 sender
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   207 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 236 ===
208     CHAPTER 3  •   TRANSPORT LAYER
is received, the receiver sends a negative acknowledgment. We can accomplish the 
same effect as a NAK if, instead of sending a NAK, we send an ACK for the last 
correctly received packet. A sender that receives two ACKs for the same packet (that 
is, receives duplicate ACKs) knows that the receiver did not correctly receive the 
packet following the packet that is being ACKed twice. Our NAK-free reliable data 
transfer protocol for a channel with bit errors is rdt2.2, shown in Figures 3.13 and 
3.14. One subtle change between rtdt2.1 and rdt2.2 is that the receiver must 
now include the sequence number of the packet being acknowledged by an ACK 
message (this is done by including the ACK, 0 or ACK, 1 argument in make_pkt() 
in the receiver FSM), and the sender must now check the sequence number of the 
packet being acknowledged by a received ACK message (this is done by including 
the 0 or 1 argument in isACK() in the sender FSM).
Reliable Data Transfer over a Lossy Channel with Bit Errors: rdt3.0
Suppose now that in addition to corrupting bits, the underlying channel can lose 
packets as well, a not-uncommon event in today’s computer networks (including 
the Internet). Two additional concerns must now be addressed by the protocol: how 
to detect packet loss and what to do when packet loss occurs. The use of check-
summing, sequence numbers, ACK packets, and retransmissions—the techniques 
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt)&& notcorrupt
(rcvpkt)&& has_seq0(rcvpkt)
sndpkt=make_pkt(ACK,checksum)
udt_send(sndpkt)
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt)&& corrupt(rcvpkt)
sndpkt=make_pkt(NAK,checksum)
udt_send(sndpkt)
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt)
 && corrupt(rcvpkt)
sndpkt=make_pkt(NAK,checksum)
udt_send(sndpkt)
sndpkt=make_pkt(ACK,checksum)
udt_send(sndpkt)
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt)&& notcorrupt(rcvpkt)
&& has_seq1(rcvpkt)
extract(rcvpkt,data)
deliver_data(data)
sndpkt=make_pkt(ACK,checksum)
udt_send(sndpkt)
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt)&& notcorrupt(rcvpkt)
 && has_seq0(rcvpkt)
extract(rcvpkt,data)
deliver_data(data)
sndpkt=make_pkt(ACK,checksum)
udt_send(sndpkt)
Wait for
0 from
below
Wait for
1 from
belowrdt_rcv(rcvpkt)&& notcorrupt
(rcvpkt)&& has_seq1(rcvpkt)
Figure 3.12 /uni2666 rdt2.1 receiver
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   208 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 237 ===
3.4  •   P RINCIPLES OF RELIAB LE DATA TRANSFER     209
Wait for
call 0 from
above
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt) &&
(corrupt(rcvpkt)||
isACK(rcvpkt,1))
udt_send(sndpkt)
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt) &&
(corrupt(rcvpkt)||
isACK(rcvpkt,0))
udt_send(sndpkt)
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt)
&& notcorrupt(rcvpkt)
&& isACK(rcvpkt,0)
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt)
&& notcorrupt(rcvpkt)
&& isACK(rcvpkt,1)
rdt_send(data)
sndpkt=make_pkt(0,data,checksum)
udt_send(sndpkt)
rdt_send(data)
sndpkt=make_pkt(1,data,checksum)
udt_send(sndpkt)
Wait for
ACK 0
Wait for
ACK 1
L L
Wait for
call 1 from
above
Figure 3.13 /uni2666 rdt2.2 sender
already developed in rdt2.2—will allow us to answer the latter concern. Handling 
the first concern will require adding a new protocol mechanism.
There are many possible approaches toward dealing with packet loss (several 
more of which are explored in the exercises at the end of the chapter). Here, we’ll 
put the burden of detecting and recovering from lost packets on the sender. Suppose 
that the sender transmits a data packet and either that packet, or the receiver’s ACK 
of that packet, gets lost. In either case, no reply is forthcoming at the sender from the 
receiver. If the sender is willing to wait long enough so that it is certain that a packet 
has been lost, it can simply retransmit the data packet. You should convince yourself 
that this protocol does indeed work.
But how long must the sender wait to be certain that something has been lost? 
The sender must clearly wait at least as long as a round-trip delay between the sender 
and receiver (which may include buffering at intermediate routers) plus whatever 
amount of time is needed to process a packet at the receiver. In many networks, this 
worst-case maximum delay is very difficult even to estimate, much less know with 
certainty. Moreover, the protocol should ideally recover from packet loss as soon as 
possible; waiting for a worst-case delay could mean a long wait until error recovery 
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   209 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 238 ===
210     CHAPTER 3  •   TRANSPORT LAYER
is initiated. The approach thus adopted in practice is for the sender to judiciously 
choose a time value such that packet loss is likely, although not guaranteed, to have 
happened. If an ACK is not received within this time, the packet is retransmitted. 
Note that if a packet experiences a particularly large delay, the sender may retrans-
mit the packet even though neither the data packet nor its ACK have been lost. This 
introduces the possibility of duplicate data packets in the sender-to-receiver chan-
nel. Happily, protocol rdt2.2 already has enough functionality (that is, sequence 
numbers) to handle the case of duplicate packets.
From the sender’s viewpoint, retransmission is a panacea. The sender does not 
know whether a data packet was lost, an ACK was lost, or if the packet or ACK was 
simply overly delayed. In all cases, the action is the same: retransmit. Implement-
ing a time-based retransmission mechanism requires a countdown timer that can 
interrupt the sender after a given amount of time has expired. The sender will thus 
need to be able to (1) start the timer each time a packet (either a first-time packet or 
a retransmission) is sent, (2) respond to a timer interrupt (taking appropriate actions), 
and (3) stop the timer.
Figure 3.15 shows the sender FSM for rdt3.0, a protocol that reliably transfers 
data over a channel that can corrupt or lose packets; in the homework problems, you’ll 
be asked to provide the receiver FSM for rdt3.0. Figure 3.16 shows how the pro-
tocol operates with no lost or delayed packets and how it handles lost data packets. In 
Figure 3.16, time moves forward from the top of the diagram toward the bottom of the 
Wait for
0 from
below
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt) &&
(corrupt(rcvpkt)||
has_seq0(rcvpkt))
sndpkt=make_pkt(ACK,0,checksum)
udt_send(sndpkt)
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt) &&
(corrupt(rcvpkt)||
has_seq1(rcvpkt))
sndpkt=make_pkt(ACK,1,checksum)
udt_send(sndpkt)
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt) && notcorrupt(rcvpkt)
&& has_seq1(rcvpkt)
extract(rcvpkt,data)
deliver_data(data)
sndpkt=make_pkt(ACK,1,checksum)
udt_send(sndpkt)
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt) && notcorrupt(rcvpkt)
&& has_seq0(rcvpkt)
extract(rcvpkt,data)
deliver_data(data)
sndpkt=make_pkt(ACK,0,checksum)
udt_send(sndpkt)
Wait for
1 from
below
Figure 3.14 /uni2666 rdt2.2 receiver
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   210 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 239 ===
3.4  •   P RINCIPLES OF RELIAB LE DATA TRANSFER     211
diagram; note that a receive time for a packet is necessarily later than the send time for 
a packet as a result of transmission and propagation delays. In Figures 3.16(b)–(d), the 
send-side brackets indicate the times at which a timer is set and later times out. Sev-
eral of the more subtle aspects of this protocol are explored in the exercises at the end 
of this chapter. Because packet sequence numbers alternate between 0 and 1, protocol 
rdt3.0 is sometimes known as the alternating-bit protocol.
We have now assembled the key elements of a data transfer protocol. Check-
sums, sequence numbers, timers, and positive and negative acknowledgment packets 
each play a crucial and necessary role in the operation of the protocol. We now have 
a working reliable data transfer protocol!
3.4.2 Pipelined Reliable Data Transfer Protocols
Protocol rdt3.0 is a functionally correct protocol, but it is unlikely that anyone 
would be happy with its performance, particularly in today’s high-speed networks. 
At the heart of rdt3.0’s performance problem is the fact that it is a stop-and-wait 
protocol.
Wait for
call 0 from
above
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt) &&
(corrupt(rcvpkt)||
isACK(rcvpkt,1))
timeout
udt_send(sndpkt)
start_timer
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt)
Lrdt_rcv(rcvpkt) &&
(corrupt(rcvpkt)||
isACK(rcvpkt,0))
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt)
&& notcorrupt(rcvpkt)
&& isACK(rcvpkt,0)
stop_timer
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt)
&& notcorrupt(rcvpkt)
&& isACK(rcvpkt,1)
stop_timer
timeout
udt_send(sndpkt)
start_timer
rdt_send(data)
sndpkt=make_pkt(0,data,checksum)
udt_send(sndpkt)
start_timer
rdt_send(data)
sndpkt=make_pkt(1,data,checksum)
udt_send(sndpkt)
start_timer
Wait for
ACK 0
Wait for
ACK 1
L
L
Wait for
call 1 from
above
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt)
L
Figure 3.15 /uni2666 rdt3.0 sender
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   211 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 240 ===
212     CHAPTER 3  •   TRANSPORT LAYER
rcv pkt0
send ACK0
rcv pkt1
send ACK1
rcv pkt0
send ACK0
Sender Receiver
a. Operation with no loss
pkt0
ACK0
pkt1
pkt0
ACK1
ACK0
(loss) X
b. Lost packet
rcv pkt0
send ACK0
rcv pkt1
send ACK1
c. Lost ACK
send pkt0
rcv ACK0
send pkt1
rcv ACK1
send pkt0
send pkt0
rcv ACK0
send pkt1
timeout
resend pkt1
rcv ACK1
send pkt0
rcv pkt0
send ACK0
rcv pkt1
(detect
duplicate)
send ACK1
send pkt0
rcv ACK0
send pkt1
rcv pkt0
send ACK0
timeout
resend pkt1
rcv pkt1
send ACK1
d. Premature timeout
rcv ACK1
send pkt0
rcv ACK1
do nothing
rcv pkt0
send ACK0
rcv pkt 1
(detect duplicate)
send ACK1
Sender Receiver ReceiverSender
pkt0
ACK0
pkt1
ACK1
ACK1
ACK0
ACK1
ACK0
pkt1
pkt0
pkt0
pkt1
pkt1
pkt0
ACK1
ACK0
X (loss)
pkt1
rcv pkt0
send ACK0
send pkt0
rcv ACK0
send pkt1
timeout
resend pkt1
rcv ACK1
send pkt0
rcv pkt0
send ACK0
rcv pkt1
send ACK1
Sender Receiver
pkt0
ACK0
pkt1
pkt0
ACK1
ACK0
Figure 3.16 /uni2666 Operation of rdt3.0, the alternating-bit protocol
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   212 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 241 ===
3.4  •   P RINCIPLES OF RELIAB LE DATA TRANSFER     213
To appreciate the performance impact of this stop-and-wait behavior, consider 
an idealized case of two hosts, one located on the West Coast of the United States 
and the other located on the East Coast, as shown in Figure 3.17. The speed-of-light 
round-trip propagation delay between these two end systems, RTT, is approximately 
30 milliseconds. Suppose that they are connected by a channel with a transmission 
rate, R, of 1 Gbps (10
9 bits per second). With a packet size, L, of 1,000 bytes (8,000 
bits) per packet, including both header fields and data, the time needed to actually 
transmit the packet into the 1 Gbps link is
dtrans = L
R = 8000 bits
109 bits/sec = 8 microseconds
Figure 3.18(a) shows that with our stop-and-wait protocol, if the sender begins 
sending the packet at t = 0, then at t = L/R = 8 microseconds, the last bit enters 
the channel at the sender side. The packet then makes its 15-msec cross-country jour-
ney, with the last bit of the packet emerging at the receiver at t = RTT/2 + L/R =
15.008 msec. Assuming for simplicity that ACK packets are extremely small (so that 
we can ignore their transmission time) and that the receiver can send an ACK as soon 
as the last bit of a data packet is received, the ACK emerges back at the sender at 
t = RTT + L/R = 30.008 msec. At this point, the sender can now transmit the next 
message. Thus, in 30.008 msec, the sender was sending for only 0.008 msec. If we 
define the utilization of the sender (or the channel) as the fraction of time the sender 
is actually busy sending bits into the channel, the analysis in Figure 3.18(a) shows 
that the stop-and-wait protocol has a rather dismal sender utilization, Usender, of
Usender =
L>R
RTT + L>R = .008
30.008 = 0.00027
Data packetsData packet
ACK packets
a. A stop-and-wait protocol in operation b. A pipelined protocol in operation
Figure 3.17 /uni2666 Stop-and-wait versus pipelined protocol
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   213 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 242 ===
214     CHAPTER 3  •   TRANSPORT LAYER
First bit of ﬁrst packet
transmitted, t = 0
Last bit of ﬁrst packet
transmitted, t = L/R
First bit of ﬁrst packet
transmitted, t = 0
Last bit of ﬁrst packet
transmitted, t = L/R
ACK arrives, send next packet,
t = RTT + L/R
a. Stop-and-wait operation
Sender Receiver
RTT
First bit of ﬁrst packet arrives
Last bit of ﬁrst packet arrives, send ACK
First bit of ﬁrst packet arrives
Last bit of ﬁrst packet arrives, send ACK
ACK arrives, send next packet,
t = RTT + L/R
b. Pipelined operation
Sender Receiver
RTT
Last bit of 2nd packet arrives, send ACK
Last bit of 3rd packet arrives, send ACK
Figure 3.18 /uni2666 Stop-and-wait and pipelined sending
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   214 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 243 ===
3.4  •   P RINCIPLES OF RELIAB LE DATA TRANSFER     215
That is, the sender was busy only 2.7 hundredths of one percent of the time! 
Viewed another way, the sender was able to send only 1,000 bytes in 30.008 mil-
liseconds, an effective throughput of only 267 kbps—even though a 1 Gbps link 
was available! Imagine the unhappy network manager who just paid a fortune for 
a gigabit capacity link but manages to get a throughput of only 267 kilobits per 
second! This is a graphic example of how network protocols can limit the capabili-
ties provided by the underlying network hardware. Also, we have neglected lower- 
layer protocol-processing times at the sender and receiver, as well as the process-
ing and queuing delays that would occur at any intermediate routers between the 
sender and receiver. Including these effects would serve only to further increase the  
delay and further accentuate the poor performance.
The solution to this particular performance problem is simple: Rather than oper-
ate in a stop-and-wait manner, the sender is allowed to send multiple packets with-
out waiting for acknowledgments, as illustrated in Figure 3.17(b). Figure 3.18(b) 
shows that if the sender is allowed to transmit three packets before having to wait for 
acknowledgments, the utilization of the sender is essentially tripled. Since the many 
in-transit sender-to-receiver packets can be visualized as filling a pipeline, this tech-
nique is known as pipelining. Pipelining has the following consequences for reliable 
data transfer protocols:
• The range of sequence numbers must be increased, since each in-transit packet 
(not counting retransmissions) must have a unique sequence number and there 
may be multiple, in-transit, unacknowledged packets.
• The sender and receiver sides of the protocols may have to buffer more than one 
packet. Minimally, the sender will have to buffer packets that have been transmit-
ted but not yet acknowledged. Buffering of correctly received packets may also 
be needed at the receiver, as discussed below.
• The range of sequence numbers needed and the buffering requirements will 
depend on the manner in which a data transfer protocol responds to lost, cor-
rupted, and overly delayed packets. Two basic approaches toward pipelined error 
recovery can be identified: Go-Back-N and selective repeat.
3.4.3 Go-Back-N (GBN)
In a Go-Back-N (GBN) protocol, the sender is allowed to transmit multiple packets 
(when available) without waiting for an acknowledgment, but is constrained to have 
no more than some maximum allowable number, N, of unacknowledged packets in 
the pipeline. We describe the GBN protocol in some detail in this section. But before 
reading on, you are encouraged to play with the GBN animation (an awesome inter-
active animation) at the companion Web site.
Figure 3.19 shows the sender’s view of the range of sequence numbers in a GBN 
protocol. If we define base to be the sequence number of the oldest unacknowledged 
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   215 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 244 ===
216     CHAPTER 3  •   TRANSPORT LAYER
packet and nextseqnum to be the smallest unused sequence number (that is, the 
sequence number of the next packet to be sent), then four intervals in the range of 
sequence numbers can be identified. Sequence numbers in the interval [0,base-1] 
correspond to packets that have already been transmitted and acknowledged. The inter-
val [base,nextseqnum-1] corresponds to packets that have been sent but not 
yet acknowledged. Sequence numbers in the interval [nextseqnum,base+N-1] 
can be used for packets that can be sent immediately, should data arrive from the 
upper layer. Finally, sequence numbers greater than or equal to base+N cannot 
be used until an unacknowledged packet currently in the pipeline (specifically, the 
packet with sequence number base) has been acknowledged.
As suggested by Figure 3.19, the range of permissible sequence numbers for 
transmitted but not yet acknowledged packets can be viewed as a window of size N 
over the range of sequence numbers. As the protocol operates, this window slides 
forward over the sequence number space. For this reason, N is often referred to as the 
window size and the GBN protocol itself as a sliding-window protocol. You might 
be wondering why we would even limit the number of outstanding, unacknowledged 
packets to a value of N in the first place. Why not allow an unlimited number of such 
packets? We’ll see in Section 3.5 that flow control is one reason to impose a limit 
on the sender. We’ll examine another reason to do so in Section 3.7, when we study 
TCP congestion control.
In practice, a packet’s sequence number is carried in a fixed-length field in the 
packet header. If k is the number of bits in the packet sequence number field, the 
range of sequence numbers is thus 
[0,2k - 1]. With a finite range of sequence num-
bers, all arithmetic involving sequence numbers must then be done using modulo 2k 
arithmetic. (That is, the sequence number space can be thought of as a ring of size 
2k, where sequence number 2k - 1 is immediately followed by sequence number 0.) 
Recall that rdt3.0 had a 1-bit sequence number and a range of sequence numbers 
of [0,1]. Several of the problems at the end of this chapter explore the consequences 
of a finite range of sequence numbers. We will see in Section 3.5 that TCP has a 
32-bit sequence number field, where TCP sequence numbers count bytes in the byte 
stream rather than packets.
Figures 3.20 and 3.21 give an extended FSM description of the sender and 
receiver sides of an ACK-based, NAK-free, GBN protocol. We refer to this FSM 
base nextseqnum
Window size
N
Key:
Already
ACK’d
Sent, not
yet ACK’d
Usable,
not yet sent
Not usable
Figure 3.19 /uni2666 Sender’s view of sequence numbers in Go-Back-N
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   216 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 245 ===
3.4  •   P RINCIPLES OF RELIAB LE DATA TRANSFER     217
rdt_send(data)
if(nextseqnum<base+N){
   sndpkt[nextseqnum]=make_pkt(nextseqnum,data,checksum)
   udt_send(sndpkt[nextseqnum])
   if(base==nextseqnum)
      start_timer
   nextseqnum++
   }
else
   refuse_data(data)
L
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt)&& notcorrupt(rcvpkt)
base=getacknum(rcvpkt)+1
If(base==nextseqnum)
   stop_timer
else
   start_timer
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt)&& corrupt(rcvpkt)
L
base=1
nextseqnum=1
timeout
start_timer
udt_send(sndpkt[base])
udt_send(sndpkt[base+1])
...
udt_send(sndpkt[nextseqnum-1])
Wait
Figure 3.20 /uni2666 Extended FSM description of the GBN sender
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt)
  && notcorrupt(rcvpkt)
  && hasseqnum(rcvpkt,expectedseqnum)
extract(rcvpkt,data)
deliver_data(data)
sndpkt=make_pkt(expectedseqnum,ACK,checksum)
udt_send(sndpkt)
expectedseqnum++
L
expectedseqnum=1
sndpkt=make_pkt(0,ACK,checksum)
default
udt_send(sndpkt)
Wait
Figure 3.21 /uni2666 Extended FSM description of the GBN receiver
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   217 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 246 ===
218     CHAPTER 3  •   TRANSPORT LAYER
description as an extended FSM because we have added variables (similar to  
programming-language variables) for base and nextseqnum, and added opera-
tions on these variables and conditional actions involving these variables. Note that 
the extended FSM specification is now beginning to look somewhat like a program-
ming-language specification. [Bochman 1984] provides an excellent survey of addi-
tional extensions to FSM techniques as well as other programming-language-based 
techniques for specifying protocols.
The GBN sender must respond to three types of events:
• Invocation from above. When rdt_send() is called from above, the sender 
first checks to see if the window is full, that is, whether there are N outstand-
ing, unacknowledged packets. If the window is not full, a packet is created and 
sent, and variables are appropriately updated. If the window is full, the sender 
simply returns the data back to the upper layer, an implicit indication that the 
window is full. The upper layer would presumably then have to try again later. 
In a real implementation, the sender would more likely have either buffered (but 
not immediately sent) this data, or would have a synchronization mechanism 
(for example, a semaphore or a flag) that would allow the upper layer to call  
rdt_send() only when the window is not full.
• Receipt of an ACK. In our GBN protocol, an acknowledgment for a packet with 
sequence number n will be taken to be a cumulative acknowledgment, indicat-
ing that all packets with a sequence number up to and including n have been 
correctly received at the receiver. We’ll come back to this issue shortly when we 
examine the receiver side of GBN.
• A timeout event. The protocol’s name, “Go-Back-N,” is derived from the sender’s 
behavior in the presence of lost or overly delayed packets. As in the stop-and-wait 
protocol, a timer will again be used to recover from lost data or acknowledgment 
packets. If a timeout occurs, the sender resends all packets that have been previ-
ously sent but that have not yet been acknowledged. Our sender in Figure 3.20 
uses only a single timer, which can be thought of as a timer for the oldest trans -
mitted but not yet acknowledged packet. If an ACK is received but there are still 
additional transmitted but not yet acknowledged packets, the timer is restarted. If 
there are no outstanding, unacknowledged packets, the timer is stopped.
The receiver’s actions in GBN are also simple. If a packet with sequence number 
n is received correctly and is in order (that is, the data last delivered to the upper layer 
came from a packet with sequence number 
n - 1), the receiver sends an ACK for 
packet n and delivers the data portion of the packet to the upper layer. In all other 
cases, the receiver discards the packet and resends an ACK for the most recently 
received in-order packet. Note that since packets are delivered one at a time to the 
upper layer, if packet k has been received and delivered, then all packets with a 
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   218 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 247 ===
3.4  •   P RINCIPLES OF RELIAB LE DATA TRANSFER     219
sequence number lower than k have also been delivered. Thus, the use of cumulative 
acknowledgments is a natural choice for GBN.
In our GBN protocol, the receiver discards out-of-order packets. Although 
it may seem silly and wasteful to discard a correctly received (but out-of-order) 
packet, there is some justification for doing so. Recall that the receiver must 
deliver data in order to the upper layer. Suppose now that packet n is expected, but 
packet 
n + 1 arrives. Because data must be delivered in order, the receiver could  
buffer (save) packet n + 1 and then deliver this packet to the upper layer after it 
had later received and delivered packet n. However, if packet n is lost, both it and 
packet n + 1 will eventually be retransmitted as a result of the GBN retransmis -
sion rule at the sender. Thus, the receiver can simply discard packet n + 1. The 
advantage of this approach is the simplicity of receiver buffering—the receiver 
need not buffer any out-of-order packets. Thus, while the sender must maintain 
the upper and lower bounds of its window and the position of nextseqnum  
within this window, the only piece of information the receiver need maintain is 
the sequence number of the next in-order packet. This value is held in the variable 
expectedseqnum, shown in the receiver FSM in Figure 3.21. Of course, the 
disadvantage of throwing away a correctly received packet is that the subsequent 
retransmission of that packet might be lost or garbled and thus even more retrans-
missions would be required.
Figure 3.22 shows the operation of the GBN protocol for the case of a window 
size of four packets. Because of this window size limitation, the sender sends pack-
ets 0 through 3 but then must wait for one or more of these packets to be acknowl-
edged before proceeding. As each successive ACK (for example, ACK0 and ACK1) 
is received, the window slides forward and the sender can transmit one new packet 
(pkt4 and pkt5, respectively). On the receiver side, packet 2 is lost and thus packets 
3, 4, and 5 are found to be out of order and are discarded.
Before closing our discussion of GBN, it is worth noting that an implementa-
tion of this protocol in a protocol stack would likely have a structure similar to that 
of the extended FSM in Figure 3.20. The implementation would also likely be in 
the form of various procedures that implement the actions to be taken in response to 
the various events that can occur. In such event-based programming, the various 
procedures are called (invoked) either by other procedures in the protocol stack, or 
as the result of an interrupt. In the sender, these events would be (1) a call from the 
upper-layer entity to invoke rdt_send(), (2) a timer interrupt, and (3) a call from 
the lower layer to invoke rdt_rcv() when a packet arrives. The programming 
exercises at the end of this chapter will give you a chance to actually implement these 
routines in a simulated, but realistic, network setting.
We note here that the GBN protocol incorporates almost all of the techniques 
that we will encounter when we study the reliable data transfer components of TCP 
in Section 3.5. These techniques include the use of sequence numbers, cumulative 
acknowledgments, checksums, and a timeout/retransmit operation.
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   219 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 248 ===
220     CHAPTER 3  •   TRANSPORT LAYER
3.4.4 Selective Repeat (SR)
The GBN protocol allows the sender to potentially “fill the pipeline” in Figure 3.17 
with packets, thus avoiding the channel utilization problems we noted with stop-
and-wait protocols. There are, however, scenarios in which GBN itself suffers from 
performance problems. In particular, when the window size and bandwidth-delay 
product are both large, many packets can be in the pipeline. A single packet error 
can thus cause GBN to retransmit a large number of packets, many unnecessarily. 
As the probability of channel errors increases, the pipeline can become filled with 
these unnecessary retransmissions. Imagine, in our message-dictation scenario, that 
Sender Receiver
 send pkt0
 send pkt1
 send pkt2
send pkt3
  (wait)
 rcv ACK0
send pkt4
 rcv ACK1
send pkt5
send pkt2
send pkt3
send pkt4
send pkt5
pkt2 timeout
rcv pkt0
send ACK0
rcv pkt1
send ACK1
rcv pkt3, discard
send ACK1
rcv pkt4, discard
send ACK1
rcv pkt5, discard
send ACK1
rcv pkt2, deliver
send ACK2
rcv pkt3, deliver
send ACK3
X
(loss)
Figure 3.22 /uni2666 Go-Back-N in operation
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   220 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 249 ===
3.4  •   P RINCIPLES OF RELIAB LE DATA TRANSFER     221
if every time a word was garbled, the surrounding 1,000 words (for example, a win-
dow size of 1,000 words) had to be repeated. The dictation would be slowed by all 
of the reiterated words.
As the name suggests, selective-repeat protocols avoid unnecessary retrans-
missions by having the sender retransmit only those packets that it suspects were 
received in error (that is, were lost or corrupted) at the receiver. This individual, 
as-needed, retransmission will require that the receiver individually acknowledge 
correctly received packets. A window size of N will again be used to limit the num-
ber of outstanding, unacknowledged packets in the pipeline. However, unlike GBN, 
the sender will have already received ACKs for some of the packets in the window. 
Figure 3.23 shows the SR sender’s view of the sequence number space. Figure 3.24 
details the various actions taken by the SR sender.
The SR receiver will acknowledge a correctly received packet whether or not it is 
in order. Out-of-order packets are buffered until any missing packets (that is, packets 
with lower sequence numbers) are received, at which point a batch of packets can be 
delivered in order to the upper layer. Figure 3.25 itemizes the various actions taken by 
the SR receiver. Figure 3.26 shows an example of SR operation in the presence of lost 
packets. Note that in Figure 3.26, the receiver initially buffers packets 3, 4, and 5, and 
delivers them together with packet 2 to the upper layer when packet 2 is finally received.
send_base nextseqnum
Window size
N
Key:
Key:
Already
ACK’d
Sent, not
yet ACK’d
Usable,
not yet sent
Not usable
Out of order
(buffered) but
already ACK’d
Expected, not
yet received
Acceptable
(within
window)
Not usable
a. Sender view of sequence numbers
b. Receiver view of sequence numbers
rcv_base
Window size
N
Figure 3.23 /uni2666  Selective-repeat (SR) sender and receiver views  
of sequence-number space
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   221 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 250 ===
222     CHAPTER 3  •   TRANSPORT LAYER
It is important to note that in Step 2 in Figure 3.25, the receiver reacknowledges 
(rather than ignores) already received packets with certain sequence numbers below 
the current window base. You should convince yourself that this reacknowledgment 
is indeed needed. Given the sender and receiver sequence number spaces in Fig -
ure/uni00A03.23, for example, if there is no ACK for packet send_base propagating from 
1. Data received from above. When data is received from above, the SR sender
checks the next available sequence number for the packet. If the sequence
number is within the sender’s window, the data is packetized and sent; other-
wise it is either buﬀered or returned to the upper layer for later transmission, 
as in GBN.
2. Timeout.T imers are again used to protect against lost packets. However, each
packet must now have its own logical timer, since only a single packet will 
be transmitted on timeout. A single hardware timer can be used to mimic the
operation of multiple logical timers [Varghese 1997].
3. ACK received. If an ACK is received, the SR sender marks that packet as 
having been received, provided it is in the window. If the packet’s sequence
number is equal to send_base, the window base is moved forward to the 
unacknowledged packet with the smallest sequence number. If the window
moves and there are untransmitted packets with sequence numbers that now
fall within the window, these packets are transmitted.
Figure 3.24 /uni2666 SR sender events and actions
1. Packet with sequence number in[rcv_base, rcv_base+N-1]is cor-
rectly received. In this case, the received packet falls within the receiver’s win-
dow and a selective ACK packet is returned to the sender. If the packet was not
previously received, it is buﬀered. If this packet has a sequence number equal to
the base of the receive window (rcv_base in Figure 3.22), then this packet,
and any previously buﬀered and consecutively numbered (beginning with
rcv_base) packets are delivered to the upper layer. The receive window is
then moved forward by the number of packets delivered to the upper layer. As
an example, consider Figure 3.26. When a packet with a sequence number of
rcv_base=2 is received, it and packets 3, 4, and 5 can be delivered to the
upper layer.
2. Packet with sequence number in[rcv_base-N, rcv_base-1]is cor-
rectly received. In this case, an ACK must be generated, even though this is a
packet that the receiver has previously acknowledged.
3. Otherwise. Ignore the packet.
Figure 3.25 /uni2666 SR receiver events and actions
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   222 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 251 ===
3.4  •   P RINCIPLES OF RELIAB LE DATA TRANSFER     223
the receiver to the sender, the sender will eventually retransmit packet send_base, 
even though it is clear (to us, not the sender!) that the receiver has already received 
that packet. If the receiver were not to acknowledge this packet, the sender’s win-
dow would never move forward! This example illustrates an important aspect of 
SR protocols (and many other protocols as well). The sender and receiver will not 
always have an identical view of what has been received correctly and what has not. 
For SR protocols, this means that the sender and receiver windows will not always 
coincide.
pkt0 rcvd, delivered, ACK0 sent
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
pkt1 rcvd, delivered, ACK1 sent
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
pkt3 rcvd, buﬀered, ACK3 sent
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
pkt4 rcvd, buﬀered, ACK4 sent
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
pkt5 rcvd; buﬀered, ACK5 sent
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
pkt2 rcvd, pkt2,pkt3,pkt4,pkt5
delivered, ACK2 sent
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
pkt0 sent
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
pkt1 sent
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
pkt2 sent
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
pkt3 sent, window full
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
ACK0 rcvd, pkt4 sent
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
ACK1 rcvd, pkt5 sent
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
pkt2 TIMEOUT, pkt2
resent
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
ACK3 rcvd, nothing sent
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
X
(loss)
Sender Receiver
Figure 3.26 /uni2666 SR operation
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   223 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 252 ===
224     CHAPTER 3  •   TRANSPORT LAYER
The lack of synchronization between sender and receiver windows has impor-
tant consequences when we are faced with the reality of a finite range of sequence 
numbers. Consider what could happen, for example, with a finite range of four packet 
sequence numbers, 0, 1, 2, 3, and a window size of three. Suppose packets 0 through 
2 are transmitted and correctly received and acknowledged at the receiver. At this 
point, the receiver’s window is over the fourth, fifth, and sixth packets, which have 
sequence numbers 3, 0, and 1, respectively. Now consider two scenarios. In the first 
scenario, shown in Figure 3.27(a), the ACKs for the first three packets are lost and 
the sender retransmits these packets. The receiver thus next receives a packet with 
sequence number 0—a copy of the first packet sent.
In the second scenario, shown in Figure 3.27(b), the ACKs for the first three 
packets are all delivered correctly. The sender thus moves its window forward and 
sends the fourth, fifth, and sixth packets, with sequence numbers 3, 0, and 1, respec-
tively. The packet with sequence number 3 is lost, but the packet with sequence 
number 0 arrives—a packet containing new data.
Now consider the receiver’s viewpoint in Figure 3.27, which has a figurative 
curtain between the sender and the receiver, since the receiver cannot “see” the 
actions taken by the sender. All the receiver observes is the sequence of messages 
it receives from the channel and sends into the channel. As far as it is concerned, 
the two scenarios in Figure 3.27 are identical. There is no way of distinguishing the 
retransmission of the first packet from an original transmission of the fifth packet. 
Clearly, a window size that is 1 less than the size of the sequence number space 
won’t work. But how small must the window size be? A problem at the end of the 
chapter asks you to show that the window size must be less than or equal to half the 
size of the sequence number space for SR protocols.
At the companion Web site, you will find an animation that illustrates the opera-
tion of the SR protocol. Try performing the same experiments that you did with the 
GBN animation. Do the results agree with what you expect?
This completes our discussion of reliable data transfer protocols. We’ve covered 
a lot of ground and introduced numerous mechanisms that together provide for reli-
able data transfer. Table 3.1 summarizes these mechanisms. Now that we have seen 
all of these mechanisms in operation and can see the “big picture,” we encourage you 
to review this section again to see how these mechanisms were incrementally added 
to cover increasingly complex (and realistic) models of the channel connecting the 
sender and receiver, or to improve the performance of the protocols.
Let’s conclude our discussion of reliable data transfer protocols by consider-
ing one remaining assumption in our underlying channel model. Recall that we 
have assumed that packets cannot be reordered within the channel between the 
sender and receiver. This is generally a reasonable assumption when the sender and 
receiver are connected by a single physical wire. However, when the “channel” 
connecting the two is a network, packet reordering can occur. One manifestation of 
packet reordering is that old copies of a packet with a sequence or acknowledgment 
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   224 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 253 ===
3.4  •   P RINCIPLES OF RELIAB LE DATA TRANSFER     225
pkt0
timeout
retransmit pkt0
0 1 2 3 0 1 2
pkt0
pkt1
pkt2
0 1 2 3 0 1 2
0 1 2 3 0 1 2
0 1 2 3 0 1 2
0 1 2 3 0 1 2ACK0
ACK1
ACK2
x
0 1 2 3 0 1 2
0 1 2 3 0 1 2
Sender window
(after receipt)
a.
b.
Receiver window
(after receipt)
receive packet
with seq number 0
0 1 2 3 0 1 2
pkt0
pkt1
pkt2
pkt3
pkt0
0 1 2 3 0 1 2
0 1 2 3 0 1 2
0 1 2 3 0 1 2
0 1 2 3 0 1 
2ACK0
ACK1
ACK2
0 1 2 3 0 1 2
0 1 2 3 0 1 2
Sender window
(after receipt)
Receiver window
(after receipt)
receive packet
with seq number 0
0 1 2 3 0 1 2
x
x
x
Figure 3.27 /uni2666  SR receiver dilemma with too-large windows: A new packet 
or a retransmission?
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   225 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 254 ===
226     CHAPTER 3  •   TRANSPORT LAYER
number of x can appear, even though neither the sender’s nor the receiver’s win -
dow contains x. With packet reordering, the channel can be thought of as essen-
tially buffering packets and spontaneously emitting these packets at any point in 
the future. Because sequence numbers may be reused, some care must be taken to 
guard against such duplicate packets. The approach taken in practice is to ensure 
that a sequence number is not reused until the sender is “sure” that any previously 
sent packets with sequence number x are no longer in the network. This is done 
by assuming that a packet cannot “live” in the network for longer than some fixed 
maximum amount of time. A maximum packet lifetime of approximately three 
minutes is assumed in the TCP extensions for high-speed networks [RFC 7323]. 
[Sunshine 1978] describes a method for using sequence numbers such that reorder-
ing problems can be completely avoided.
Table 3.1
 /uni2666 Summary of reliable data transfer mechanisms and their use
Mechanism Use, Comments
Checksum Used to detect bit errors in a transmitted packet.
Timer Used to timeout/retransmit a packet, possibly because the packet (or its ACK) 
was lost within the channel. Because timeouts can occur when a packet is delayed 
but not lost (premature timeout), or when a packet has been received by the 
receiver but the receiver-to-sender ACK has been lost, duplicate copies of a packet 
may be received by a receiver.
Sequence number Used for sequential numbering of packets of data flowing from sender to receiver. 
Gaps in the sequence numbers of received packets allow the receiver to detect a 
lost packet. Packets with duplicate sequence numbers allow the receiver to detect 
duplicate copies of a packet.
Acknowledgment Used by the receiver to tell the sender that a packet or set of packets has been 
received correctly. Acknowledgments will typically carry the sequence number of 
the packet or packets being acknowledged. Acknowledgments may be individual 
or cumulative, depending on the protocol.
Negative acknowledgment Used by the receiver to tell the sender that a packet has not been received 
correctly. Negative acknowledgments will typically carry the sequence number  
of the packet that was not received correctly.
Window, pipelining The sender may be restricted to sending only packets with sequence numbers that 
fall within a given range. By allowing multiple packets to be transmitted but not 
yet acknowledged, sender utilization can be increased over a stop-and-wait mode 
of operation. We’ll see shortly that the window size may be set on the basis of 
the receiver’s ability to receive and buffer messages, or the level of congestion in 
the network, or both.
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   226 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 255 ===
3.5  •   CONNECTION-ORIENTED TRANSPORT : TCP     227
3.5  Connection-Oriented Transport: TCP
Now that we have covered the underlying principles of reliable data transfer, 
let’s turn to TCP—the Internet’s transport-layer, connection-oriented, reliable 
transport protocol. In this section, we’ll see that in order to provide reliable 
data transfer, TCP relies on many of the underlying principles discussed in 
the previous section, including error detection, retransmissions, cumulative 
acknowledgments, timers, and header fields for sequence and acknowledgment 
numbers. TCP is defined in RFC 793, RFC 1122, RFC 2018, RFC 5681, and 
RFC 7323.
3.5.1 The TCP Connection
TCP is said to be connection-oriented because before one application process can 
begin to send data to another, the two processes must first “handshake” with each 
other—that is, they must send some preliminary segments to each other to establish 
the parameters of the ensuing data transfer. As part of TCP connection establish-
ment, both sides of the connection will initialize many TCP state variables (many of 
which will be discussed in this section and in Section 3.7) associated with the TCP 
connection.
The TCP “connection” is not an end-to-end TDM or FDM circuit as in a circuit-
switched network. Instead, the “connection” is a logical one, with common state 
residing only in the TCPs in the two communicating end systems. Recall that because 
the TCP protocol runs only in the end systems and not in the intermediate network 
elements (routers and link-layer switches), the intermediate network elements do 
not maintain TCP connection state. In fact, the intermediate routers are completely 
oblivious to TCP connections; they see datagrams, not connections.
A TCP connection provides a full-duplex service: If there is a TCP con-
nection between Process A on one host and Process B on another host, then 
application-layer data can flow from Process A to Process B at the same time 
as application-layer data flows from Process B to Process A. A TCP connec-
tion is also always point-to-point, that is, between a single sender and a single 
receiver. So-called “multicasting” (see the online supplementary materials for 
this text)—the transfer of data from one sender to many receivers in a single 
send operation—is not possible with TCP. With TCP, two hosts are company 
and three are a crowd!
Let’s now take a look at how a TCP connection is established. Suppose a process 
running in one host wants to initiate a connection with another process in another 
host. Recall that the process that is initiating the connection is called the client  
process, while the other process is called the server process. The client application 
process first informs the client transport layer that it wants to establish a connection 
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   227 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 256 ===
228     CHAPTER 3  •   TRANSPORT LAYER
to a process in the server. Recall from Section 2.7.2, a Python client program does 
this by issuing the command
clientSocket.connect((serverName,serverPort))
where serverName is the name of the server and serverPort identifies the 
process on the server. TCP in the client then proceeds to establish a TCP connec-
tion with TCP in the server. At the end of this section we discuss in some detail the 
connection-establishment procedure. For now it suffices to know that the client first 
sends a special TCP segment; the server responds with a second special TCP seg-
ment; and finally the client responds again with a third special segment. The first 
two segments carry no payload, that is, no application-layer data; the third of these 
segments may carry a payload. Because three segments are sent between the two 
hosts, this connection-establishment procedure is often referred to as a three-way 
handshake.
VINTON CERF, ROBERT KAHN, AND TCP/IP
In the early 1970s, packet-switched networks began to proliferate, with the 
ARPAnet—the precursor of the Internet—being just one of many networks. Each of 
these networks had its own protocol. Two researchers, Vinton Cerf and Robert Kahn, 
recognized the importance of interconnecting these networks and invented a cross-
network protocol called TCP/IP, which stands for Transmission Control Protocol/
Internet Protocol. Although Cerf and Kahn began by seeing the protocol as a single 
entity, it was later split into its two parts, TCP and IP, which operated separately. 
Cerf and Kahn published a paper on TCP/IP in May 1974 in IEEE Transactions on 
Communications Technology [Cerf 1974].
The TCP/IP protocol, which is the bread and butter of today’s Internet, was 
devised before PCs, workstations, smartphones, and tablets, before the prolifera-
tion of Ethernet, cable, and DSL, WiFi, and other access network technologies, and 
before the Web, social media, and streaming video. Cerf and Kahn saw the need 
for a networking protocol that, on the one hand, provides broad support for yet-to-
be-defined applications and, on the other hand, allows arbitrary hosts and link-layer 
protocols to interoperate.
In 2004, Cerf and Kahn received the ACM’s Turing Award, considered the 
“Nobel Prize of Computing” for “pioneering work on internetworking, including the 
design and implementation of the Internet’s basic communications protocols, TCP/IP, 
and for inspired leadership in networking.”
CASE HISTORY
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   228 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 257 ===
3.5  •   CONNECTION-ORIENTED TRANSPORT : TCP     229
Once a TCP connection is established, the two application processes can send 
data to each other. Let’s consider the sending of data from the client process to the 
server process. The client process passes a stream of data through the socket (the door 
of the process), as described in Section 2.7. Once the data passes through the door, 
the data is in the hands of TCP running in the client. As shown in Figure 3.28, TCP 
directs this data to the connection’s send buffer, which is one of the buffers that is 
set aside during the initial three-way handshake. From time to time, TCP will grab 
chunks of data from the send buffer and pass the data to the network layer. Interest-
ingly, the TCP specification [RFC 793] is very laid back about specifying when TCP 
should actually send buffered data, stating that TCP should “send that data in seg-
ments at its own convenience.” The maximum amount of data that can be grabbed 
and placed in a segment is limited by the maximum segment size (MSS). The MSS 
is typically set by first determining the length of the largest link-layer frame that 
can be sent by the local sending host (the so-called maximum transmission unit, 
MTU), and then setting the MSS to ensure that a TCP segment (when encapsulated 
in an IP datagram) plus the TCP/IP header length (typically 40 bytes) will fit into a 
single link-layer frame. Both Ethernet and PPP link-layer protocols have an MTU of 
1,500 bytes. Thus, a typical value of MSS is 1460 bytes. Approaches have also been 
proposed for discovering the path MTU—the largest link-layer frame that can be sent 
on all links from source to destination [RFC 1191]—and setting the MSS based on 
the path MTU value. Note that the MSS is the maximum amount of application-layer 
data in the segment, not the maximum size of the TCP segment including headers. 
(This terminology is confusing, but we have to live with it, as it is well entrenched.)
TCP pairs each chunk of client data with a TCP header, thereby forming TCP 
segments. The segments are passed down to the network layer, where they are sepa-
rately encapsulated within network-layer IP datagrams. The IP datagrams are then 
sent into the network. When TCP receives a segment at the other end, the segment’s 
data is placed in the TCP connection’s receive buffer, as shown in Figure 3.28. The 
application reads the stream of data from this buffer. Each side of the connection has 
Process
writes data
Process
reads data
TCP
send
buffer
Socket
TCP
receive
buffer
Socket
Segment Segment
Figure 3.28 /uni2666 TCP send and receive buffers
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   229 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 258 ===
230     CHAPTER 3  •   TRANSPORT LAYER
its own send buffer and its own receive buffer. (You can see the online flow-control 
interactive animation  at http://www.awl.com/kurose-ross, which provides an anima-
tion of the send and receive buffers.)
We see from this discussion that a TCP connection consists of buffers, variables, 
and a socket connection to a process in one host, and another set of buffers, vari-
ables, and a socket connection to a process in another host. As mentioned earlier, no 
buffers or variables are allocated to the connection in the network elements (routers, 
switches, and repeaters) between the hosts.
3.5.2 TCP Segment Structure
Having taken a brief look at the TCP connection, let’s examine the TCP segment 
structure. The TCP segment consists of header fields and a data field. The data field 
contains a chunk of application data. As mentioned above, the MSS limits the maxi-
mum size of a segment’s data field. When TCP sends a large file, such as an image as 
part of a Web page, it typically breaks the file into chunks of size MSS (except for the 
last chunk, which will often be less than the MSS). Interactive applications, however, 
often transmit data chunks that are smaller than the MSS; for example, with remote 
login applications such as Telnet and ssh, the data field in the TCP segment is often 
only one byte. Because the TCP header is typically 20 bytes (12 bytes more than the 
UDP header), segments sent by Telnet and ssh may be only 21 bytes in length.
Figure 3.29 shows the structure of the TCP segment. As with UDP, the header 
includes source and destination port numbers, which are used for multiplexing/
demultiplexing data from/to upper-layer applications. Also, as with UDP, the header 
includes a checksum field. A TCP segment header also contains the following fields:
• The 32-bit sequence number field and the 32-bit acknowledgment number 
field are used by the TCP sender and receiver in implementing a reliable data 
transfer service, as discussed below.
• The 16-bit receive window field is used for flow control. We will see shortly that 
it is used to indicate the number of bytes that a receiver is willing to accept.
• The 4-bit header length field specifies the length of the TCP header in 32-bit 
words. The TCP header can be of variable length due to the TCP options field. 
(Typically, the options field is empty, so that the length of the typical TCP header 
is 20 bytes.)
• The optional and variable-length options field is used when a sender and receiver 
negotiate the maximum segment size (MSS) or as a window scaling factor for use 
in high-speed networks. A time-stamping option is also defined. See RFC 854 
and RFC 1323 for additional details.
• The flag field contains 6 bits. The ACK bit is used to indicate that the value 
carried in the acknowledgment field is valid; that is, the segment contains an 
acknowledgment for a segment that has been successfully received. The RST, 
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   230 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 259 ===
3.5  •   CONNECTION-ORIENTED TRANSPORT : TCP     231
SYN, and FIN bits are used for connection setup and teardown, as we will discuss 
at the end of this section. The CWR and ECE bits are used in explicit congestion 
notification, as discussed in Section 3.7.2. Setting the PSH bit indicates that the 
receiver should pass the data to the upper layer immediately. Finally, the URG bit 
is used to indicate that there is data in this segment that the sending-side upper-
layer entity has marked as “urgent.” The location of the last byte of this urgent 
data is indicated by the 16-bit urgent data pointer field. TCP must inform the 
receiving-side upper-layer entity when urgent data exists and pass it a pointer to 
the end of the urgent data. (In practice, the PSH, URG, and the urgent data pointer 
are not used. However, we mention these fields for completeness.)
Our experience as teachers is that our students sometimes find discussion of 
packet formats rather dry and perhaps a bit boring. For a fun and fanciful look at 
TCP header fields, particularly if you love Legos™ as we do, see [Pomeranz 2010].
Sequence Numbers and Acknowledgment Numbers
Two of the most important fields in the TCP segment header are the sequence number 
field and the acknowledgment number field. These fields are a critical part of TCP’s 
reliable data transfer service. But before discussing how these fields are used to pro-
vide reliable data transfer, let us first explain what exactly TCP puts in these fields.
Source port #
Internet checksum
Header
length Unused
URG
ECE
CWR
ACK
PSH
RST
SYN
FIN
32 bits
Dest port #
Receive window
Urgent data pointer
Sequence number
Acknowledgment number
Options
Data
Figure 3.29 /uni2666 TCP segment structure
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   231 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 260 ===
232     CHAPTER 3  •   TRANSPORT LAYER
TCP views data as an unstructured, but ordered, stream of bytes. TCP’s use of 
sequence numbers reflects this view in that sequence numbers are over the stream 
of transmitted bytes and not over the series of transmitted segments. The sequence 
number for a segment is therefore the byte-stream number of the first byte in the 
segment. Let’s look at an example. Suppose that a process in Host A wants to send a 
stream of data to a process in Host B over a TCP connection. The TCP in Host A will 
implicitly number each byte in the data stream. Suppose that the data stream consists 
of a file consisting of 500,000 bytes, that the MSS is 1,000 bytes, and that the first 
byte of the data stream is numbered 0. As shown in Figure 3.30, TCP constructs 500 
segments out of the data stream. The first segment gets assigned sequence number 
0, the second segment gets assigned sequence number 1,000, the third segment gets 
assigned sequence number 2,000, and so on. Each sequence number is inserted in the 
sequence number field in the header of the appropriate TCP segment.
Now let’s consider acknowledgment numbers. These are a little trickier than 
sequence numbers. Recall that TCP is full-duplex, so that Host A may be receiving 
data from Host B while it sends data to Host B (as part of the same TCP connection). 
Each of the segments that arrive from Host B has a sequence number for the data 
flowing from B to A. The acknowledgment number that Host A puts in its segment 
is the sequence number of the next byte Host A is expecting from Host B. It is good 
to look at a few examples to understand what is going on here. Suppose that Host A 
has received all bytes numbered 0 through 535 from B and suppose that it is about 
to send a segment to Host B. Host A is waiting for byte 536 and all the subsequent 
bytes in Host B’s data stream. So Host A puts 536 in the acknowledgment number 
field of the segment it sends to B.
As another example, suppose that Host A has received one segment from Host 
B containing bytes 0 through 535 and another segment containing bytes 900 through 
1,000. For some reason Host A has not yet received bytes 536 through 899. In this 
example, Host A is still waiting for byte 536 (and beyond) in order to re-create B’s 
data stream. Thus, A’s next segment to B will contain 536 in the acknowledgment 
number field. Because TCP only acknowledges bytes up to the first missing byte in 
the stream, TCP is said to provide cumulative acknowledgments.
01 1,000 1,999 499,999
File
Data for 1st segment Data for 2nd segment
Figure 3.30 /uni2666 Dividing file data into TCP segments
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   232 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 261 ===
3.5  •   CONNECTION-ORIENTED TRANSPORT : TCP     233
This last example also brings up an important but subtle issue. Host A received 
the third segment (bytes 900 through 1,000) before receiving the second segment 
(bytes 536 through 899). Thus, the third segment arrived out of order. The sub-
tle issue is: What does a host do when it receives out-of-order segments in a TCP 
connection? Interestingly, the TCP RFCs do not impose any rules here and leave 
the decision up to the programmers implementing a TCP implementation. There 
are basically two choices: either (1) the receiver immediately discards out-of-order 
segments (which, as we discussed earlier, can simplify receiver design), or (2) the 
receiver keeps the out-of-order bytes and waits for the missing bytes to fill in the 
gaps. Clearly, the latter choice is more efficient in terms of network bandwidth, and 
is the approach taken in practice.
In Figure 3.30, we assumed that the initial sequence number was zero. In truth, 
both sides of a TCP connection randomly choose an initial sequence number. This 
is done to minimize the possibility that a segment that is still present in the network 
from an earlier, already-terminated connection between two hosts is mistaken for a 
valid segment in a later connection between these same two hosts (which also happen 
to be using the same port numbers as the old connection) [Sunshine 1978].
Telnet: A Case Study for Sequence and Acknowledgment Numbers
Telnet, defined in RFC 854, is a popular application-layer protocol used for remote 
login. It runs over TCP and is designed to work between any pair of hosts. Unlike the 
bulk data transfer applications discussed in Chapter 2, Telnet is an interactive appli-
cation. We discuss a Telnet example here, as it nicely illustrates TCP sequence and 
acknowledgment numbers. We note that many users now prefer to use the SSH proto-
col rather than Telnet, since data sent in a Telnet connection (including passwords!) 
are not encrypted, making Telnet vulnerable to eavesdropping attacks (as discussed 
in Section 8.7).
Suppose Host A initiates a Telnet session with Host B. Because Host A initiates 
the session, it is labeled the client, and Host B is labeled the server. Each character 
typed by the user (at the client) will be sent to the remote host; the remote host will 
send back a copy of each character, which will be displayed on the Telnet user’s 
screen. This “echo back” is used to ensure that characters seen by the Telnet user 
have already been received and processed at the remote site. Each character thus 
traverses the network twice between the time the user hits the key and the time the 
character is displayed on the user’s monitor.
Now suppose the user types a single letter, ‘C,’ and then grabs a coffee. Let’s 
examine the TCP segments that are sent between the client and server. As shown 
in Figure 3.31, we suppose the starting sequence numbers are 42 and 79 for the cli-
ent and server, respectively. Recall that the sequence number of a segment is the 
sequence number of the first byte in the data field. Thus, the first segment sent from 
the client will have sequence number 42; the first segment sent from the server will 
have sequence number 79. Recall that the acknowledgment number is the sequence 
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   233 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 262 ===
234     CHAPTER 3  •   TRANSPORT LAYER
number of the next byte of data that the host is waiting for. After the TCP connec-
tion is established but before any data is sent, the client is waiting for byte 79 and the 
server is waiting for byte 42.
As shown in Figure 3.31, three segments are sent. The first segment is sent from 
the client to the server, containing the 1-byte ASCII representation of the letter ‘C’ in 
its data field. This first segment also has 42 in its sequence number field, as we just 
described. Also, because the client has not yet received any data from the server, this 
first segment will have 79 in its acknowledgment number field.
The second segment is sent from the server to the client. It serves a dual purpose. 
First it provides an acknowledgment of the data the server has received. By putting 
43 in the acknowledgment field, the server is telling the client that it has successfully 
received everything up through byte 42 and is now waiting for bytes 43 onward. The 
second purpose of this segment is to echo back the letter ‘C.’ Thus, the second seg-
ment has the ASCII representation of ‘C’ in its data field. This second segment has 
the sequence number 79, the initial sequence number of the server-to-client data flow 
of this TCP connection, as this is the very first byte of data that the server is send-
ing. Note that the acknowledgment for client-to-server data is carried in a segment 
Time Time
Host A Host B
User types
'C'
Seq=42, ACK=79, data='C'
Seq=79, ACK=43, data='C'
Seq=43, ACK=80
Host ACKs
receipt of 'C',
echoes back 
'C'
Host ACKs
receipt of
echoed 'C'
Figure 3.31 /uni2666  Sequence and acknowledgment numbers for a simple Telnet 
application over TCP
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   234 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 263 ===
3.5  •   CONNECTION-ORIENTED TRANSPORT : TCP     235
carrying server-to-client data; this acknowledgment is said to be piggybacked on the 
server-to-client data segment.
The third segment is sent from the client to the server. Its sole purpose is to 
acknowledge the data it has received from the server. (Recall that the second seg-
ment contained data—the letter ‘C’—from the server to the client.) This segment 
has an empty data field (that is, the acknowledgment is not being piggybacked with 
any client-to-server data). The segment has 80 in the acknowledgment number field 
because the client has received the stream of bytes up through byte sequence number 
79 and it is now waiting for bytes 80 onward. You might think it odd that this seg-
ment also has a sequence number since the segment contains no data. But because 
TCP has a sequence number field, the segment needs to have some sequence number.
3.5.3 Round-Trip Time Estimation and Timeout
TCP, like our rdt protocol in Section 3.4, uses a timeout/retransmit mechanism to 
recover from lost segments. Although this is conceptually simple, many subtle issues 
arise when we implement a timeout/retransmit mechanism in an actual protocol such 
as TCP. Perhaps the most obvious question is the length of the timeout intervals. 
Clearly, the timeout should be larger than the connection’s round-trip time (RTT), 
that is, the time from when a segment is sent until it is acknowledged. Otherwise, 
unnecessary retransmissions would be sent. But how much larger? How should the 
RTT be estimated in the first place? Should a timer be associated with each and 
every unacknowledged segment? So many questions! Our discussion in this section 
is based on the TCP work in [Jacobson 1988] and the current IETF recommendations 
for managing TCP timers [RFC 6298].
Estimating the Round-Trip Time
Let’s begin our study of TCP timer management by considering how TCP estimates 
the round-trip time between sender and receiver. This is accomplished as follows. 
The sample RTT, denoted SampleRTT, for a segment is the amount of time between 
when the segment is sent (that is, passed to IP) and when an acknowledgment for 
the segment is received. Instead of measuring a SampleRTT for every transmitted 
segment, most TCP implementations take only one SampleRTT measurement at 
a time. That is, at any point in time, the SampleRTT is being estimated for only 
one of the transmitted but currently unacknowledged segments, leading to a new 
value of SampleRTT approximately once every RTT. Also, TCP never computes a  
SampleRTT for a segment that has been retransmitted; it only measures  
SampleRTT for segments that have been transmitted once [Karn 1987]. (A problem 
at the end of the chapter asks you to consider why.)
Obviously, the SampleRTT values will fluctuate from segment to segment due 
to congestion in the routers and to the varying load on the end systems. Because of 
this fluctuation, any given SampleRTT value may be atypical. In order to estimate 
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   235 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 264 ===
236     CHAPTER 3  •   TRANSPORT LAYER
a typical RTT, it is therefore natural to take some sort of average of the SampleRTT 
values. TCP maintains an average, called EstimatedRTT, of the SampleRTT 
values. Upon obtaining a new SampleRTT, TCP updates EstimatedRTT accord-
ing to the following formula:
EstimatedRTT = (1 – /uni03B1) # EstimatedRTT + /uni03B1 # SampleRTT
The formula above is written in the form of a programming-language state-
ment—the new value of EstimatedRTT is a weighted combination of the previous 
value of EstimatedRTT and the new value for SampleRTT. The recommended 
value of /uni03B1 is /uni03B1 = 0.125 (that is, 1/8) [RFC 6298], in which case the formula above 
becomes:
EstimatedRTT = 0.875 # EstimatedRTT + 0.125 # SampleRTT
Note that EstimatedRTT is a weighted average of the SampleRTT values. As 
discussed in a homework problem at the end of this chapter, this weighted average 
puts more weight on recent samples than on old samples. This is natural, as the more 
recent samples better reflect the current congestion in the network. In statistics, such 
an average is called an exponential weighted moving average (EWMA). The word 
“exponential” appears in EWMA because the weight of a given SampleRTT decays 
exponentially fast as the updates proceed. In the homework problems, you will be 
asked to derive the exponential term in EstimatedRTT.
Figure 3.32 shows the SampleRTT values and EstimatedRTT for a value 
of /uni03B1 = 1/8 for a TCP connection between gaia.cs.umass.edu (in Amherst, 
Massachusetts) to fantasia.eurecom.fr (in the south of France). Clearly, 
the variations in the SampleRTT are smoothed out in the computation of the 
EstimatedRTT.
In addition to having an estimate of the RTT, it is also valuable to have a meas-
ure of the variability of the RTT. [RFC 6298] defines the RTT variation, DevRTT, 
as an estimate of how much SampleRTT typically deviates from EstimatedRTT:
DevRTT = (1 – /uni03B2) 
# DevRTT + /uni03B2 # | SampleRTT – EstimatedRTT |
Note that DevRTT is an EWMA of the difference between SampleRTT and 
EstimatedRTT. If the SampleRTT values have little fluctuation, then DevRTT 
will be small; on the other hand, if there is a lot of fluctuation, DevRTT will be large. 
The recommended value of /uni03B2 is 0.25.
Setting and Managing the Retransmission Timeout Interval
Given values of EstimatedRTT and DevRTT, what value should be used for 
TCP’s timeout interval? Clearly, the interval should be greater than or equal to  
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   236 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 265 ===
3.5  •   CONNECTION-ORIENTED TRANSPORT : TCP     237
EstimatedRTT, or unnecessary retransmissions would be sent. But the timeout 
interval should not be too much larger than EstimatedRTT; otherwise, when a 
segment is lost, TCP would not quickly retransmit the segment, leading to large  
data transfer delays. It is therefore desirable to set the timeout equal to the  
EstimatedRTT plus some margin. The margin should be large when there is a lot 
of fluctuation in the SampleRTT values; it should be small when there is little fluc-
tuation. The value of DevRTT should thus come into play here. All of these consid-
erations are taken into account in TCP’s method for determining the retransmission 
timeout interval:
TimeoutInterval = EstimatedRTT + 4 
# DevRTT
An initial TimeoutInterval value of 1 second is recommended [RFC 
6298]. Also, when a timeout occurs, the value of TimeoutInterval is doubled 
to avoid a premature timeout occurring for a subsequent segment that will soon be 
acknowledged. However, as soon as a segment is received and EstimatedRTT is 
updated, the TimeoutInterval is again computed using the formula above.
TCP provides reliable data transfer by using positive acknowledgments and timers in much 
the same way that we studied in Section 3.4. TCP acknowledges data that has been 
received correctly, and it then retransmits segments when segments or their corresponding 
acknowledgments are thought to be lost or corrupted. Certain versions of TCP also have 
an implicit NAK mechanism—with TCP’s fast retransmit mechanism, the receipt of three 
duplicate ACKs for a given segment serves as an implicit NAK for the following segment, 
triggering retransmission of that segment before timeout. TCP uses sequences of numbers to 
allow the receiver to identify lost or duplicate segments. Just as in the case of our reliable 
data transfer protocol, rdt3.0, TCP cannot itself tell for certain if a segment, or its ACK, is 
lost, corrupted, or overly delayed. At the sender, TCP’s response will be the same: retrans-
mit the segment in question.
TCP also uses pipelining, allowing the sender to have multiple transmitted but yet-to-
be-acknowledged segments outstanding at any given time. We saw earlier that pipelining 
can greatly improve a session’s throughput when the ratio of the segment size to round-
trip delay is small. The specific number of outstanding, unacknowledged segments that a 
sender can have is determined by TCP’s flow-control and congestion-control mechanisms. 
TCP flow control is discussed at the end of this section; TCP congestion control is discussed 
in Section 3.7. For the time being, we must simply be aware that the TCP sender uses 
pipelining.
PRINCIPLES IN PRACTICE
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   237 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 266 ===
238     CHAPTER 3  •   TRANSPORT LAYER
3.5.4 Reliable Data Transfer
Recall that the Internet’s network-layer service (IP service) is unreliable. IP does 
not guarantee datagram delivery, does not guarantee in-order delivery of datagrams, 
and does not guarantee the integrity of the data in the datagrams. With IP service, 
datagrams can overflow router buffers and never reach their destination, datagrams 
can arrive out of order, and bits in the datagram can get corrupted (flipped from 0 to 
1 and vice versa). Because transport-layer segments are carried across the network 
by IP datagrams, transport-layer segments can suffer from these problems as well.
TCP creates a reliable data transfer service on top of IP’s unreliable best-
effort service. TCP’s reliable data transfer service ensures that the data stream that 
a process reads out of its TCP receive buffer is uncorrupted, without gaps, with-
out duplication, and in sequence; that is, the byte stream is exactly the same byte 
stream that was sent by the end system on the other side of the connection. How TCP 
provides a reliable data transfer involves many of the principles that we studied in  
Section 3.4.
In our earlier development of reliable data transfer techniques, it was conceptu-
ally easiest to assume that an individual timer is associated with each transmitted 
but not yet acknowledged segment. While this is great in theory, timer management 
can require considerable overhead. Thus, the recommended TCP timer management 
RTT (milliseconds)
150
200
250
300
350
100
18 15 22 29 36 43 50
Time (seconds)
Sample RTT
57 64 71 78 85 92 99 106
Estimated RTT
Figure 3.32 /uni2666 RTT samples and RTT estimates
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   238 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 267 ===
3.5  •   CONNECTION-ORIENTED TRANSPORT : TCP     239
procedures [RFC 6298] use only a single retransmission timer, even if there are mul-
tiple transmitted but not yet acknowledged segments. The TCP protocol described in 
this section follows this single-timer recommendation.
We will discuss how TCP provides reliable data transfer in two incremental 
steps. We first present a highly simplified description of a TCP sender that uses only 
timeouts to recover from lost segments; we then present a more complete description 
that uses duplicate acknowledgments in addition to timeouts. In the ensuing discus-
sion, we suppose that data is being sent in only one direction, from Host A to Host B, 
and that Host A is sending a large file.
Figure 3.33 presents a highly simplified description of a TCP sender. We see 
that there are three major events related to data transmission and retransmission 
in the TCP sender: data received from application above; timer timeout; and ACK 
/* Assume sender is not constrained by TCP ﬂow or congestion control, that data from above is less
than MSS in size, and that data transfer is in one direction only. */
NextSeqNum=InitialSeqNumber
SendBase=InitialSeqNumber
loop (forever) {
switch(event)
event: data received from application above
create TCP segment with sequence number NextSeqNum
if (timer currently not running)
start timer
pass segment to IP
NextSeqNum=NextSeqNum+length(data)
break;
event: timer timeout
retransmit not-yet-acknowledged segment with
smallest sequence number
start timer
break;
event: ACK received, with ACK ﬁeld value of y
if (y > SendBase) {
SendBase=y
if (there are currently any not-yet-acknowledged segments)
start timer
}
break;
} /* end of loop forever */
Figure 3.33 /uni2666 Simplified TCP sender
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   239 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 268 ===
240     CHAPTER 3  •   TRANSPORT LAYER
receipt. Upon the occurrence of the first major event, TCP receives data from the 
application, encapsulates the data in a segment, and passes the segment to IP. Note 
that each segment includes a sequence number that is the byte-stream number of 
the first data byte in the segment, as described in Section 3.5.2. Also note that if the 
timer is already not running for some other segment, TCP starts the timer when the 
segment is passed to IP. (It is helpful to think of the timer as being associated with 
the oldest unacknowledged segment.) The expiration interval for this timer is the 
TimeoutInterval, which is calculated from EstimatedRTT and DevRTT, as 
described in Section 3.5.3.
The second major event is the timeout. TCP responds to the timeout event by 
retransmitting the segment that caused the timeout. TCP then restarts the timer.
The third major event that must be handled by the TCP sender is the arrival of 
an acknowledgment segment (ACK) from the receiver (more specifically, a segment 
containing a valid ACK field value). On the occurrence of this event, TCP compares 
the ACK value y with its variable SendBase. The TCP state variable SendBase 
is the sequence number of the oldest unacknowledged byte. (Thus SendBase–1 is 
the sequence number of the last byte that is known to have been received correctly 
and in order at the receiver.) As indicated earlier, TCP uses cumulative acknowl-
edgments, so that y acknowledges the receipt of all bytes before byte number y. If  
y > SendBase, then the ACK is acknowledging one or more previously unac-
knowledged segments. Thus the sender updates its SendBase variable; it also 
restarts the timer if there currently are any not-yet-acknowledged segments.
A Few Interesting Scenarios
We have just described a highly simplified version of how TCP provides reliable data 
transfer. But even this highly simplified version has many subtleties. To get a good 
feeling for how this protocol works, let’s now walk through a few simple scenarios. 
Figure 3.34 depicts the first scenario, in which Host A sends one segment to Host B. 
Suppose that this segment has sequence number 92 and contains 8 bytes of data. After 
sending this segment, Host A waits for a segment from B with acknowledgment num-
ber 100. Although the segment from A is received at B, the acknowledgment from B 
to A gets lost. In this case, the timeout event occurs, and Host A retransmits the same 
segment. Of course, when Host B receives the retransmission, it observes from the 
sequence number that the segment contains data that has already been received. Thus, 
TCP in Host B will discard the bytes in the retransmitted segment.
In a second scenario, shown in Figure 3.35, Host A sends two segments back to 
back. The first segment has sequence number 92 and 8 bytes of data, and the second 
segment has sequence number 100 and 20 bytes of data. Suppose that both segments 
arrive intact at B, and B sends two separate acknowledgments for each of these seg-
ments. The first of these acknowledgments has acknowledgment number 100; the 
second has acknowledgment number 120. Suppose now that neither of the acknowl-
edgments arrives at Host A before the timeout. When the timeout event occurs, Host 
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   240 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 269 ===
3.5  •   CONNECTION-ORIENTED TRANSPORT : TCP     241
A resends the first segment with sequence number 92 and restarts the timer. As long 
as the ACK for the second segment arrives before the new timeout, the second seg-
ment will not be retransmitted.
In a third and final scenario, suppose Host A sends the two segments, exactly 
as in the second example. The acknowledgment of the first segment is lost in the 
network, but just before the timeout event, Host A receives an acknowledgment with 
acknowledgment number 120. Host A therefore knows that Host B has received  
everything up through byte 119; so Host A does not resend either of the two  
segments. This scenario is illustrated in Figure 3.36.
Doubling the Timeout Interval
We now discuss a few modifications that most TCP implementations employ. The 
first concerns the length of the timeout interval after a timer expiration. In this modi-
fication, whenever the timeout event occurs, TCP retransmits the not-yet-acknowl-
edged segment with the smallest sequence number, as described above. But each 
time TCP retransmits, it sets the next timeout interval to twice the previous value, 
Time Time
Host A Host B
Timeout
Seq=92, 8 bytes data
Seq=92, 8 bytes data
ACK=100
ACK=100
X
(loss)
Figure 3.34 /uni2666 Retransmission due to a lost acknowledgment
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   241 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 270 ===
242     CHAPTER 3  •   TRANSPORT LAYER
rather than deriving it from the last EstimatedRTT and DevRTT (as described 
in Section 3.5.3). For example, suppose TimeoutInterval associated with 
the oldest not yet acknowledged segment is .75 sec when the timer first expires. 
TCP will then retransmit this segment and set the new expiration time to 1.5 sec. If 
the timer expires again 1.5 sec later, TCP will again retransmit this segment, now 
setting the expiration time to 3.0 sec. Thus, the intervals grow exponentially after 
each retransmission. However, whenever the timer is started after either of the two 
other events (that is, data received from application above, and ACK received), the  
TimeoutInterval is derived from the most recent values of EstimatedRTT 
and DevRTT.
This modification provides a limited form of congestion control. (More com-
prehensive forms of TCP congestion control will be studied in Section 3.7.) The 
timer expiration is most likely caused by congestion in the network, that is, too many 
packets arriving at one (or more) router queues in the path between the source and 
destination, causing packets to be dropped and/or long queuing delays. In times of 
congestion, if the sources continue to retransmit packets persistently, the congestion 
Time Time
Host A Host B
seq=92 timeout interval
Seq=92, 8 bytes data
Seq=100, 20 bytes data
ACK=100
ACK=120
ACK=120
seq=92 timeout interval
Seq=92, 8 bytes data
Figure 3.35 /uni2666 Segment 100 not retransmitted
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   242 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 271 ===
3.5  •   CONNECTION-ORIENTED TRANSPORT : TCP     243
may get worse. Instead, TCP acts more politely, with each sender retransmitting after 
longer and longer intervals. We will see that a similar idea is used by Ethernet when 
we study CSMA/CD in Chapter 6.
Fast Retransmit
One of the problems with timeout-triggered retransmissions is that the timeout period 
can be relatively long. When a segment is lost, this long timeout period forces the 
sender to delay resending the lost packet, thereby increasing the end-to-end delay. 
Fortunately, the sender can often detect packet loss well before the timeout event 
occurs by noting so-called duplicate ACKs. A duplicate ACK is an ACK that reac-
knowledges a segment for which the sender has already received an earlier acknowl-
edgment. To understand the sender’s response to a duplicate ACK, we must look at 
why the receiver sends a duplicate ACK in the first place. Table 3.2 summarizes the 
TCP receiver’s ACK generation policy [RFC 5681]. When a TCP receiver receives 
Time Time
Host A Host B
Seq=92 timeout interval
Seq=92, 8 bytes data
Seq=100,  20 bytes dataACK=100
ACK=120
X
(loss)
Figure 3.36 /uni2666  A cumulative acknowledgment avoids retransmission of the 
first segment
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   243 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 272 ===
244     CHAPTER 3  •   TRANSPORT LAYER
a segment with a sequence number that is larger than the next, expected, in-order 
sequence number, it detects a gap in the data stream—that is, a missing segment. 
This gap could be the result of lost or reordered segments within the network. Since 
TCP does not use negative acknowledgments, the receiver cannot send an explicit 
negative acknowledgment back to the sender. Instead, it simply reacknowledges 
(that is, generates a duplicate ACK for) the last in-order byte of data it has received. 
(Note that Table 3.2 allows for the case that the receiver does not discard out-of-
order segments.)
Because a sender often sends a large number of segments back to back, if one 
segment is lost, there will likely be many back-to-back duplicate ACKs. If the TCP 
sender receives three duplicate ACKs for the same data, it takes this as an indication 
that the segment following the segment that has been ACKed three times has been 
lost. (In the homework problems, we consider the question of why the sender waits 
for three duplicate ACKs, rather than just a single duplicate ACK.) In the case that 
three duplicate ACKs are received, the TCP sender performs a fast retransmit [RFC 
5681], retransmitting the missing segment before that segment’s timer expires. This 
is shown in Figure 3.37, where the second segment is lost, then retransmitted before 
its timer expires. For TCP with fast retransmit, the following code snippet replaces 
the ACK received event in Figure 3.33:
event: ACK received, with ACK field value of y
            if (y > SendBase) {
            SendBase=y
            if (there are currently any not yet
                       acknowledged segments)
               start timer
               }
Table 3.2
 /uni2666 TCP ACK Generation Recommendation [RFC 5681]
Event TCP Receiver Action
Arrival of in-order segment with expected sequence number. All  
data up to expected sequence number already acknowledged.
Delayed ACK. Wait up to 500 msec for arrival of another in-order segment.  
If next in-order segment does not arrive in this interval, send an ACK.
Arrival of in-order segment with expected sequence number. One  
other in-order segment waiting for ACK transmission.
Immediately send single cumulative ACK, ACKing both in-order segments.
Arrival of out-of-order segment with higher-than-expected sequence 
number. Gap detected.
Immediately send duplicate ACK, indicating sequence number of next 
expected byte (which is the lower end of the gap).
Arrival of segment that partially or completely fills in gap in  
received data.
Immediately send ACK, provided that segment starts at the lower end  
of gap.
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   244 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 273 ===
3.5  •   CONNECTION-ORIENTED TRANSPORT : TCP     245
Host A Host B
seq=100, 20 bytes of dataTimeout
Time Time
X
seq=100, 20 bytes of data
seq=92, 8 bytes of data
seq=120, 15 bytes of data
seq=135, 6 bytes of data
seq=141, 16 bytes of data
ack=100
ack=100
ack=100
ack=100
Figure 3.37 /uni2666  Fast retransmit: retransmitting the missing segment before 
the segment’s timer expires
            else {/* a duplicate ACK for already ACKed
                   segment */
               increment number of duplicate ACKs
                   received for y
               if (number of duplicate ACKS received
                   for y==3)
                   /* TCP fast retransmit */
                   resend segment with sequence number y
               }
           break;
We noted earlier that many subtle issues arise when a timeout/retransmit mech-
anism is implemented in an actual protocol such as TCP. The procedures above, 
which have evolved as a result of more than 30 years of experience with TCP timers, 
should convince you that this is indeed the case!
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   245 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 274 ===
246     CHAPTER 3  •   TRANSPORT LAYER
Go-Back-N or Selective Repeat?
Let us close our study of TCP’s error-recovery mechanism by considering the fol -
lowing question: Is TCP a GBN or an SR protocol? Recall that TCP acknowledg-
ments are cumulative and correctly received but out-of-order segments are not 
individually ACKed by the receiver. Consequently, as shown in Figure 3.33 (see 
also Figure 3.19), the TCP sender need only maintain the smallest sequence number 
of a transmitted but unacknowledged byte ( SendBase) and the sequence number 
of the next byte to be sent (NextSeqNum). In this sense, TCP looks a lot like a 
GBN-style protocol. But there are some striking differences between TCP and Go-
Back-N. Many TCP implementations will buffer correctly received but out-of-order 
segments [Stevens 1994]. Consider also what happens when the sender sends a 
sequence of segments 1, 2, . . . , N, and all of the segments arrive in order without 
error at the receiver. Further suppose that the acknowledgment for packet 
n 6 N 
gets lost, but the remaining N - 1 acknowledgments arrive at the sender before 
their respective timeouts. In this example, GBN would retransmit not only packet n, 
but also all of the subsequent packets n + 1, n + 2, . . . , N. TCP, on the other hand, 
would retransmit at most one segment, namely, segment n. Moreover, TCP would 
not even retransmit segment n if the acknowledgment for segment n + 1 arrived 
before the timeout for segment n .
A proposed modification to TCP, the so-called selective acknowledgment  
[RFC 2018], allows a TCP receiver to acknowledge out-of-order segments selectively 
rather than just cumulatively acknowledging the last correctly received, in-order  
segment. When combined with selective retransmission—skipping the retransmis-
sion of segments that have already been selectively acknowledged by the receiver—
TCP looks a lot like our generic SR protocol. Thus, TCP’s error-recovery mechanism 
is probably best categorized as a hybrid of GBN and SR protocols.
3.5.5 Flow Control
Recall that the hosts on each side of a TCP connection set aside a receive buffer 
for the connection. When the TCP connection receives bytes that are correct and in 
sequence, it places the data in the receive buffer. The associated application process 
will read data from this buffer, but not necessarily at the instant the data arrives. 
Indeed, the receiving application may be busy with some other task and may not even 
attempt to read the data until long after it has arrived. If the application is relatively 
slow at reading the data, the sender can very easily overflow the connection’s receive 
buffer by sending too much data too quickly.
TCP provides a flow-control service to its applications to eliminate the pos-
sibility of the sender overflowing the receiver’s buffer. Flow control is thus a speed-
matching service—matching the rate at which the sender is sending against the rate 
at which the receiving application is reading. As noted earlier, a TCP sender can also 
be throttled due to congestion within the IP network; this form of sender control is 
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   246 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 275 ===
3.5  •   CONNECTION-ORIENTED TRANSPORT : TCP     247
referred to as congestion control, a topic we will explore in detail in Sections 3.6 
and 3.7. Even though the actions taken by flow and congestion control are similar 
(the throttling of the sender), they are obviously taken for very different reasons. 
Unfortunately, many authors use the terms interchangeably, and the savvy reader 
would be wise to distinguish between them. Let’s now discuss how TCP provides its 
flow-control service. In order to see the forest for the trees, we suppose throughout 
this section that the TCP implementation is such that the TCP receiver discards out-
of-order segments.
TCP provides flow control by having the sender maintain a variable called 
the receive window. Informally, the receive window is used to give the sender an 
idea of how much free buffer space is available at the receiver. Because TCP is 
full-duplex, the sender at each side of the connection maintains a distinct receive 
window. Let’s investigate the receive window in the context of a file transfer. Sup-
pose that Host A is sending a large file to Host B over a TCP connection. Host B 
allocates a receive buffer to this connection; denote its size by RcvBuffer. From 
time to time, the application process in Host B reads from the buffer. Define the 
following variables:
• LastByteRead: the number of the last byte in the data stream read from the 
buffer by the application process in B
• LastByteRcvd: the number of the last byte in the data stream that has arrived 
from the network and has been placed in the receive buffer at B
Because TCP is not permitted to overflow the allocated buffer, we must have
LastByteRcvd – LastByteRead
… RcvBuffer
The receive window, denoted rwnd is set to the amount of spare room in the buffer:
rwnd = RcvBuffer – [LastByteRcvd – LastByteRead]
Because the spare room changes with time, rwnd is dynamic. The variable rwnd is 
illustrated in Figure 3.38.
How does the connection use the variable rwnd to provide the flow-control 
service? Host B tells Host A how much spare room it has in the connection buffer 
by placing its current value of rwnd in the receive window field of every segment it 
sends to A. Initially, Host B sets rwnd = RcvBuffer. Note that to pull this off, 
Host B must keep track of several connection-specific variables.
Host A in turn keeps track of two variables, LastByteSent and Last-
ByteAcked, which have obvious meanings. Note that the difference between these 
two variables, LastByteSent – LastByteAcked, is the amount of unac-
knowledged data that A has sent into the connection. By keeping the amount of 
unacknowledged data less than the value of rwnd, Host A is assured that it is not 
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   247 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 276 ===
248     CHAPTER 3  •   TRANSPORT LAYER
overflowing the receive buffer at Host B. Thus, Host A makes sure throughout the 
connection’s life that
LastByteSent – LastByteAcked… rwnd
There is one minor technical problem with this scheme. To see this, suppose Host 
B’s receive buffer becomes full so that rwnd = 0. After advertising rwnd = 0 to 
Host A, also suppose that B has nothing to send to A. Now consider what happens. 
As the application process at B empties the buffer, TCP does not send new seg-
ments with new rwnd values to Host A; indeed, TCP sends a segment to Host A 
only if it has data to send or if it has an acknowledgment to send. Therefore, Host 
A is never informed that some space has opened up in Host B’s receive buffer—
Host A is blocked and can transmit no more data! To solve this problem, the TCP 
specification requires Host A to continue to send segments with one data byte when 
B’s receive window is zero. These segments will be acknowledged by the receiver. 
Eventually the buffer will begin to empty and the acknowledgments will contain a 
nonzero rwnd value.
The online site at for this book provides an interactive animation that illustrates 
the operation of the TCP receive window.
Having described TCP’s flow-control service, we briefly mention here that UDP 
does not provide flow control and consequently, segments may be lost at the receiver 
due to buffer overflow. For example, consider sending a series of UDP segments 
from a process on Host A to a process on Host B. For a typical UDP implementation, 
UDP will append the segments in a finite-sized buffer that “precedes” the corre-
sponding socket (that is, the door to the process). The process reads one entire seg-
ment at a time from the buffer. If the process does not read the segments fast enough 
from the buffer, the buffer will overflow and segments will get dropped.
Application
process 
Data
from IP TCP data
in buffer
rwnd
RcvBuﬀer
Spare room
Figure 3.38 /uni2666  The receive window (rwnd) and the receive buffer 
(RcvBuffer)
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   248 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 277 ===
3.5  •   CONNECTION-ORIENTED TRANSPORT : TCP     249
3.5.6 TCP Connection Management
In this subsection, we take a closer look at how a TCP connection is established and 
torn down. Although this topic may not seem particularly thrilling, it is important 
because TCP connection establishment can significantly add to perceived delays (for 
example, when surfing the Web). Furthermore, many of the most common network 
attacks—including the incredibly popular SYN flood attack (see sidebar on the SYN 
flood attack)—exploit vulnerabilities in TCP connection management. Let’s first 
take a look at how a TCP connection is established. Suppose a process running in 
one host (client) wants to initiate a connection with another process in another host 
(server). The client application process first informs the client TCP that it wants to 
establish a connection to a process in the server. The TCP in the client then proceeds 
to establish a TCP connection with the TCP in the server in the following manner:
• Step 1. The client-side TCP first sends a special TCP segment to the server-side 
TCP. This special segment contains no application-layer data. But one of the flag 
bits in the segment’s header (see Figure 3.29), the SYN bit, is set to 1. For this 
reason, this special segment is referred to as a SYN segment. In addition, the cli-
ent randomly chooses an initial sequence number (client_isn) and puts this 
number in the sequence number field of the initial TCP SYN segment. This seg-
ment is encapsulated within an IP datagram and sent to the server. There has been 
considerable interest in properly randomizing the choice of the client_isn in 
order to avoid certain security attacks [CERT 2001–09; RFC 4987].
• Step 2. Once the IP datagram containing the TCP SYN segment arrives at the 
server host (assuming it does arrive!), the server extracts the TCP SYN segment 
from the datagram, allocates the TCP buffers and variables to the connection, 
and sends a connection-granted segment to the client TCP. (We’ll see in Chapter 
8 that the allocation of these buffers and variables before completing the third 
step of the three-way handshake makes TCP vulnerable to a denial-of-service 
attack known as SYN flooding.) This connection-granted segment also contains 
no application-layer data. However, it does contain three important pieces of 
information in the segment header. First, the SYN bit is set to 1. Second, the 
acknowledgment field of the TCP segment header is set to client_isn+1. 
Finally, the server chooses its own initial sequence number (server_isn) and 
puts this value in the sequence number field of the TCP segment header. This 
connection-granted segment is saying, in effect, “I received your SYN packet to 
start a connection with your initial sequence number, client_isn. I agree to 
establish this connection. My own initial sequence number is server_isn.” 
The connection-granted segment is referred to as a SYNACK segment.
• Step 3. Upon receiving the SYNACK segment, the client also allocates buffers 
and variables to the connection. The client host then sends the server yet another 
segment; this last segment acknowledges the server’s connection-granted segment 
(the client does so by putting the value server_isn+1 in the acknowledgment 
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   249 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 278 ===
250     CHAPTER 3  •   TRANSPORT LAYER
field of the TCP segment header). The SYN bit is set to zero, since the connection 
is established. This third stage of the three-way handshake may carry client-to-
server data in the segment payload.
Once these three steps have been completed, the client and server hosts can send 
segments containing data to each other. In each of these future segments, the SYN 
bit will be set to zero. Note that in order to establish the connection, three packets 
are sent between the two hosts, as illustrated in Figure 3.39. For this reason, this 
connection-establishment procedure is often referred to as a three-way handshake. 
Several aspects of the TCP three-way handshake are explored in the homework prob-
lems (Why are initial sequence numbers needed? Why is a three-way handshake, 
as opposed to a two-way handshake, needed?). It’s interesting to note that a rock 
climber and a belayer (who is stationed below the rock climber and whose job it is 
to handle the climber’s safety rope) use a three-way-handshake communication pro-
tocol that is identical to TCP’s to ensure that both sides are ready before the climber 
begins ascent.
All good things must come to an end, and the same is true with a TCP connec-
tion. Either of the two processes participating in a TCP connection can end the con-
nection. When a connection ends, the “resources” (that is, the buffers and variables) 
Time Time
Client host
Connection
request
Connection
granted
Server host
SYN=1, seq=client_isn
SYN=1, seq=server_isn,
ack=client_isn+1
SYN=0, seq=client_isn+1,
ack=server_isn+1ACK
Figure 3.39 /uni2666 TCP three-way handshake: segment exchange
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   250 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 279 ===
3.5  •   CONNECTION-ORIENTED TRANSPORT : TCP     251
in the hosts are deallocated. As an example, suppose the client decides to close the 
connection, as shown in Figure 3.40. The client application process issues a close 
command. This causes the client TCP to send a special TCP segment to the server 
process. This special segment has a flag bit in the segment’s header, the FIN bit (see 
Figure 3.29), set to 1. When the server receives this segment, it sends the client an 
acknowledgment segment in return. The server then sends its own shutdown segment, 
which has the FIN bit set to 1. Finally, the client acknowledges the server’s shutdown 
segment. At this point, all the resources in the two hosts are now deallocated.
During the life of a TCP connection, the TCP protocol running in each host 
makes transitions through various TCP states. Figure 3.41 illustrates a typical 
sequence of TCP states that are visited by the client TCP. The client TCP begins 
in the CLOSED state. The application on the client side initiates a new TCP con-
nection (by creating a Socket object in our Python examples from Chapter 2). This 
causes TCP in the client to send a SYN segment to TCP in the server. After hav-
ing sent the SYN segment, the client TCP enters the SYN_SENT state. While in 
the SYN_SENT state, the client TCP waits for a segment from the server TCP that 
includes an acknowledgment for the client’s previous segment and has the SYN bit 
Time Time
Client
Close
Close
Server
FIN
ACK
ACK
FIN
Closed
Timed wait
Figure 3.40 /uni2666 Closing a TCP connection
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   251 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 280 ===
252     CHAPTER 3  •   TRANSPORT LAYER
set to 1. Having received such a segment, the client TCP enters the ESTABLISHED 
state. While in the ESTABLISHED state, the TCP client can send and receive TCP 
segments containing payload (that is, application-generated) data.
Suppose that the client application decides it wants to close the connection. (Note 
that the server could also choose to close the connection.) This causes the client TCP 
to send a TCP segment with the FIN bit set to 1 and to enter the FIN_WAIT_1 state. 
While in the FIN_WAIT_1 state, the client TCP waits for a TCP segment from the 
server with an acknowledgment. When it receives this segment, the client TCP enters 
the FIN_WAIT_2 state. While in the FIN_WAIT_2 state, the client waits for another 
segment from the server with the FIN bit set to 1; after receiving this segment, the client 
TCP acknowledges the server’s segment and enters the TIME_WAIT state. The TIME_
WAIT state lets the TCP client resend the final acknowledgment in case the ACK is 
lost. The time spent in the TIME_WAIT state is implementation-dependent, but typical 
values are 30 seconds, 1 minute, and 2 minutes. After the wait, the connection formally 
closes and all resources on the client side (including port numbers) are released.
Figure 3.42 illustrates the series of states typically visited by the server-side 
TCP, assuming the client begins connection teardown. The transitions are self-
explanatory. In these two state-transition diagrams, we have only shown how a TCP 
connection is normally established and shut down. We have not described what hap-
pens in certain pathological scenarios, for example, when both sides of a connection 
want to initiate or shut down at the same time. If you are interested in learning about 
CLOSED
SYN_SENT
ESTABLISHED
FIN_WAIT_1
FIN_WAIT_2
TIME_WAIT
Send SYN
Send FIN
Receive ACK, 
send nothing
Wait 30 seconds
Receive FIN, 
send ACK
Receive SYN & ACK, 
send ACK
Client application
initiates a TCP connection
Client application
initiates close connection
Figure 3.41 /uni2666 A typical sequence of TCP states visited by a client TCP
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   252 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 281 ===
3.5  •   CONNECTION-ORIENTED TRANSPORT : TCP     253
this and other advanced issues concerning TCP, you are encouraged to see Stevens’ 
comprehensive book [Stevens 1994].
Our discussion above has assumed that both the client and server are prepared to 
communicate, that is, that the server is listening on the port to which the client sends 
its SYN segment. Let’s consider what happens when a host receives a TCP segment 
whose port numbers or source IP address do not match with any of the ongoing sock-
ets in the host. For example, suppose a host receives a TCP SYN packet with desti-
nation port 80, but the host is not accepting connections on port 80 (that is, it is not 
running a Web server on port 80). Then the host will send a special reset segment to 
the source. This TCP segment has the RST flag bit (see Section 3.5.2) set to 1. Thus, 
when a host sends a reset segment, it is telling the source “I don’t have a socket for 
that segment. Please do not resend the segment.” When a host receives a UDP packet 
whose destination port number doesn’t match with an ongoing UDP socket, the host 
sends a special ICMP datagram, as discussed in Chapter 5.
Now that we have a good understanding of TCP connection management, let’s 
revisit the nmap port-scanning tool and examine more closely how it works. To explore 
a specific TCP port, say port 6789, on a target host, nmap will send a TCP SYN seg-
ment with destination port 6789 to that host. There are three possible outcomes:
• The source host receives a TCP SYNACK segment from the target host. Since this 
means that an application is running with TCP port 6789 on the target post, nmap 
returns “open.”
CLOSED
LISTEN
SYN_RCVD
ESTABLISHED
CLOSE_WAIT
LAST_ACK
Receive FIN,
send ACK
Receive ACK, 
send nothing
Send FIN Receive SYN 
send SYN & ACK
Server application
creates a listen socket
Receive ACK, 
send nothing
Figure 3.42 /uni2666  A typical sequence of TCP states visited by a server-side TCP
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   253 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 282 ===
254     CHAPTER 3  •   TRANSPORT LAYER
THE SYN FLOOD ATTACK
We’ve seen in our discussion of TCP’s three-way handshake that a server allocates 
and initializes connection variables and buffers in response to a received SYN. The 
server then sends a SYNACK in response, and awaits an ACK segment from the cli-
ent. If the client does not send an ACK to complete the third step of this 3-way hand-
shake, eventually (often after a minute or more) the server will terminate the half-open 
connection and reclaim the allocated resources.
This TCP connection management protocol sets the stage for a classic Denial of 
Service (DoS) attack known as the SYN flood attack. In this attack, the attacker(s) send 
a large number of TCP SYN segments, without completing the third handshake step. With 
this deluge of SYN segments, the server’s connection resources become exhausted as 
they are allocated (but never used!) for half-open connections; legitimate clients are then 
denied service. Such SYN flooding attacks were among the first documented DoS attacks 
[CERT SYN 1996]. Fortunately, an effective defense known as SYN cookies [RFC 
4987] are now deployed in most major operating systems. SYN cookies work as follows:
•  When the server receives a SYN segment, it does not know if the segment is 
coming from a legitimate user or is part of a SYN flood attack. So, instead of 
creating a half-open TCP connection for this SYN, the server creates an initial 
TCP sequence number that is a complicated function (hash function) of source 
and destination IP addresses and port numbers of the SYN segment, as well as 
a secret number only known to the server. This carefully crafted initial sequence 
number is the so-called “cookie.” The server then sends the client a SYNACK 
packet with this special initial sequence number. Importantly, the server does not 
remember the cookie or any other state information corresponding to the SYN.
•  A legitimate client will return an ACK segment. When the server receives this 
ACK, it must verify that the ACK corresponds to some SYN sent earlier. But how 
is this done if the server maintains no memory about SYN segments? As you may 
have guessed, it is done with the cookie. Recall that for a legitimate ACK, the 
value in the acknowledgment field is equal to the initial sequence number in the 
SYNACK (the cookie value in this case) plus one (see Figure 3.39). The server 
can then run the same hash function using the source and destination IP address 
and port numbers in the SYNACK (which are the same as in the original SYN) 
and the secret number. If the result of the function plus one is the same as the 
acknowledgment (cookie) value in the client’s SYNACK, the server concludes that 
the ACK corresponds to an earlier SYN segment and is hence valid. The server 
then creates a fully open connection along with a socket.
•  On the other hand, if the client does not return an ACK segment, then the origi-
nal SYN has done no harm at the server, since the server hasn’t yet allocated 
any resources in response to the original bogus SYN.
FOCUS ON SECURITY
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   254 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 283 ===
3.6  •   P RINCIPLES OF CONGESTION C ONTROL     255
• The source host receives a TCP RST segment from the target host. This means 
that the SYN segment reached the target host, but the target host is not running 
an application with TCP port 6789. But the attacker at least knows that the seg-
ments destined to the host at port 6789 are not blocked by any firewall on the path 
between source and target hosts. (Firewalls are discussed in Chapter 8.)
• The source receives nothing. This likely means that the SYN segment was blocked 
by an intervening firewall and never reached the target host.
Nmap is a powerful tool that can “case the joint” not only for open TCP ports, 
but also for open UDP ports, for firewalls and their configurations, and even for 
the/uni00A0versions of applications and operating systems. Most of this is done by manip-
ulating TCP connection-management segments. You can download nmap from 
www.nmap.org.
This completes our introduction to error control and flow control in TCP. In 
Section 3.7, we’ll return to TCP and look at TCP congestion control in some depth. 
Before doing so, however, we first step back and examine congestion-control issues 
in a broader context.
3.6  Principles of Congestion Control
In the previous sections, we examined both the general principles and specific TCP 
mechanisms used to provide for a reliable data transfer service in the face of packet 
loss. We mentioned earlier that, in practice, such loss typically results from the over-
flowing of router buffers as the network becomes congested. Packet retransmission 
thus treats a symptom of network congestion (the loss of a specific transport-layer 
segment) but does not treat the cause of network congestion—too many sources 
attempting to send data at too high a rate. To treat the cause of network congestion, 
mechanisms are needed to throttle senders in the face of network congestion.
In this section, we consider the problem of congestion control in a general con-
text, seeking to understand why congestion is a bad thing, how network congestion 
is manifested in the performance received by upper-layer applications, and various 
approaches that can be taken to avoid, or react to, network congestion. This more 
general study of congestion control is appropriate since, as with reliable data trans-
fer, it is high on our “top-ten” list of fundamentally important problems in network-
ing. The following section contains a detailed study of TCP’s congestion-control 
algorithm.
3.6.1 The Causes and the Costs of Congestion
Let’s begin our general study of congestion control by examining three increas-
ingly complex scenarios in which congestion occurs. In each case, we’ll look at why  M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   255 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 284 ===
256     CHAPTER 3  •   TRANSPORT LAYER
congestion occurs in the first place and at the cost of congestion (in terms of resources 
not fully utilized and poor performance received by the end systems). We’ll not (yet) 
focus on how to react to, or avoid, congestion but rather focus on the simpler issue of 
understanding what happens as hosts increase their transmission rate and the network 
becomes congested.
Scenario 1: Two Senders, a Router with Infinite Buffers
We begin by considering perhaps the simplest congestion scenario possible: Two 
hosts (A and B) each have a connection that shares a single hop between source and 
destination, as shown in Figure 3.43.
Let’s assume that the application in Host A is sending data into the connection 
(for example, passing data to the transport-level protocol via a socket) at an average 
rate of 
lin bytes/sec. These data are original in the sense that each unit of data is sent 
into the socket only once. The underlying transport-level protocol is a simple one. 
Data is encapsulated and sent; no error recovery (e.g., retransmission), flow control, 
or congestion control is performed. Ignoring the additional overhead due to adding 
transport- and lower-layer header information, the rate at which Host A offers traffic 
to the router in this first scenario is thus 
lin bytes/sec. Host B operates in a similar 
manner, and we assume for simplicity that it too is sending at a rate of lin bytes/sec. 
Packets from Hosts A and B pass through a router and over a shared outgoing link 
of capacity R. The router has buffers that allow it to store incoming packets when 
the packet-arrival rate exceeds the outgoing link’s capacity. In this first scenario, we 
assume that the router has an infinite amount of buffer space.
Figure 3.44 plots the performance of Host A’s connection under this first sce-
nario. The left graph plots the per-connection throughput (number of bytes per 
Host B
Unlimited shared
output link buffers
lin: original data
Host A Host DHost C
lout 
Figure 3.43 /uni2666  Congestion scenario 1: Two connections sharing a single 
hop with infinite buffers
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   256 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 285 ===
3.6  •   P RINCIPLES OF CONGESTION C ONTROL     257
second at the receiver) as a function of the connection-sending rate. For a sending 
rate between 0 and R/2, the throughput at the receiver equals the sender’s sending 
rate—everything sent by the sender is received at the receiver with a finite delay. 
When the sending rate is above R/2, however, the throughput is only R/2. This upper 
limit on throughput is a consequence of the sharing of link capacity between two 
connections. The link simply cannot deliver packets to a receiver at a steady-state 
rate that exceeds R/2. No matter how high Hosts A and B set their sending rates, they 
will each never see a throughput higher than R/2.
Achieving a per-connection throughput of R/2 might actually appear to be a good 
thing, because the link is fully utilized in delivering packets to their destinations. The 
right-hand graph in Figure 3.44, however, shows the consequence of operating near link 
capacity. As the sending rate approaches R/2 (from the left), the average delay becomes 
larger and larger. When the sending rate exceeds R/2, the average number of queued 
packets in the router is unbounded, and the average delay between source and destina-
tion becomes infinite (assuming that the connections operate at these sending rates for 
an infinite period of time and there is an infinite amount of buffering available). Thus, 
while operating at an aggregate throughput of near R may be ideal from a throughput 
standpoint, it is far from ideal from a delay standpoint. Even in this (extremely) ideal-
ized scenario, we’ve already found one cost of a congested network—large queuing 
delays are experienced as the packet-arrival rate nears the link capacity.
Scenario 2: Two Senders and a Router with Finite Buffers
Let’s now slightly modify scenario 1 in the following two ways (see Figure 3.45). 
First, the amount of router buffering is assumed to be finite. A consequence of this 
real-world assumption is that packets will be dropped when arriving to an already-
full buffer. Second, we assume that each connection is reliable. If a packet containing 
R/2
R/2
Delay
R/2
lin lin
lout
a. b.
Figure 3.44 /uni2666  Congestion scenario 1: Throughput and delay as a function 
of host sending rate
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   257 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 286 ===
258     CHAPTER 3  •   TRANSPORT LAYER
a transport-level segment is dropped at the router, the sender will eventually retrans-
mit it. Because packets can be retransmitted, we must now be more careful with our 
use of the term sending rate. Specifically, let us again denote the rate at which the 
application sends original data into the socket by 
lin bytes/sec. The rate at which the 
transport layer sends segments (containing original data and retransmitted data) into 
the network will be denoted l/uni2032in bytes/sec. l/uni2032in is sometimes referred to as the offered 
load to the network.
The performance realized under scenario 2 will now depend strongly on how 
retransmission is performed. First, consider the unrealistic case that Host A is able 
to somehow (magically!) determine whether or not a buffer is free in the router and 
thus sends a packet only when a buffer is free. In this case, no loss would occur, 
lin 
would be equal to l/uni2032in, and the throughput of the connection would be equal to lin. 
This case is shown in Figure 3.46(a). From a throughput standpoint, performance 
is ideal—everything that is sent is received. Note that the average host sending rate 
cannot exceed R/2 under this scenario, since packet loss is assumed never to occur.
Consider next the slightly more realistic case that the sender retransmits only 
when a packet is known for certain to be lost. (Again, this assumption is a bit of 
a stretch. However, it is possible that the sending host might set its timeout large 
enough to be virtually assured that a packet that has not been acknowledged has been 
lost.) In this case, the performance might look something like that shown in Fig-
ure/uni00A03.46(b). To appreciate what is happening here, consider the case that the offered 
load, 
l/uni2032in (the rate of original data transmission plus retransmissions), equals R/2. 
According to Figure 3.46(b), at this value of the offered load, the rate at which data 
Finite shared output
link buffers
Host BHost A Host DHost C
lout 
lin: original data
l’in: original data, plus
retransmitted data
Figure 3.45 /uni2666  Scenario 2: Two hosts (with retransmissions) and a router 
with finite buffers
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   258 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 287 ===
3.6  •   P RINCIPLES OF CONGESTION C ONTROL     259
are delivered to the receiver application is R/3. Thus, out of the 0.5R units of data 
transmitted, 0.333R bytes/sec (on average) are original data and 0.166R bytes/sec (on 
average) are retransmitted data. We see here another cost of a congested network—
the sender must perform retransmissions in order to compensate for dropped (lost) 
packets due to buffer overflow.
Finally, let us consider the case that the sender may time out prematurely and 
retransmit a packet that has been delayed in the queue but not yet lost. In this case, 
both the original data packet and the retransmission may reach the receiver. Of 
course, the receiver needs but one copy of this packet and will discard the retrans-
mission. In this case, the work done by the router in forwarding the retransmitted 
copy of the original packet was wasted, as the receiver will have already received 
the original copy of this packet. The router would have better used the link trans-
mission capacity to send a different packet instead. Here then is yet another cost of 
a congested network—unneeded retransmissions by the sender in the face of large 
delays may cause a router to use its link bandwidth to forward unneeded copies of a 
packet. Figure 3.46 (c) shows the throughput versus offered load when each packet 
is assumed to be forwarded (on average) twice by the router. Since each packet is 
forwarded twice, the throughput will have an asymptotic value of R/4 as the offered 
load approaches R/2.
Scenario 3: Four Senders, Routers with Finite Buffers, and  
Multihop Paths
In our final congestion scenario, four hosts transmit packets, each over overlap-
ping two-hop paths, as shown in Figure 3.47. We again assume that each host uses 
a timeout/retransmission mechanism to implement a reliable data transfer service, 
that all hosts have the same value of 
lin, and that all router links have capacity  
R bytes/sec.
R/2
R/2 R/2
lout
a. b.
R/2lout
R/3
R/2
R/2
loutR/4
c.
l’in l’in l’in
Figure 3.46 /uni2666 Scenario 2 performance with finite buffers
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   259 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 288 ===
260     CHAPTER 3  •   TRANSPORT LAYER
Let’s consider the connection from Host A to Host C, passing through routers 
R1 and R2. The A–C connection shares router R1 with the D–B connection and 
shares router R2 with the B–D connection. For extremely small values of lin, buffer 
overflows are rare (as in congestion scenarios 1 and 2), and the throughput approxi-
mately equals the offered load. For slightly larger values of lin, the corresponding 
throughput is also larger, since more original data is being transmitted into the net-
work and delivered to the destination, and overflows are still rare. Thus, for small 
values of 
lin, an increase in lin results in an increase in lout.
Having considered the case of extremely low traffic, let’s next examine the case 
that lin (and hence l/uni2032in) is extremely large. Consider router R2. The A–C traffic 
arriving to router R2 (which arrives at R2 after being forwarded from R1) can have 
an arrival rate at R2 that is at most R, the capacity of the link from R1 to R2, regard-
less of the value of lin. If l/uni2032in is extremely large for all connections (including the  
Host BHost A
R1
R4 R2
R3
Host CHost D Finite shared output
link buffers
lin: original data
l’in: original
data, plus
retransmitted
data
l
out
Figure 3.47 /uni2666 Four senders, routers with finite buffers, and multihop paths
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   260 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 289 ===
3.6  •   P RINCIPLES OF CONGESTION C ONTROL     261
B–D connection), then the arrival rate of B–D traffic at R2 can be much larger than 
that of the A–C traffic. Because the A–C and B–D traffic must compete at router 
R2 for the limited amount of buffer space, the amount of A–C traffic that success-
fully gets through R2 (that is, is not lost due to buffer overflow) becomes smaller 
and smaller as the offered load from B–D gets larger and larger. In the limit, as the 
offered load approaches infinity, an empty buffer at R2 is immediately filled by a 
B–D packet, and the throughput of the A–C connection at R2 goes to zero. This, in 
turn, implies that the A–C end-to-end throughput goes to zero in the limit of heavy 
traffic. These considerations give rise to the offered load versus throughput tradeoff 
shown in Figure 3.48.
The reason for the eventual decrease in throughput with increasing offered 
load is evident when one considers the amount of wasted work done by the net-
work. In the high-traffic scenario outlined above, whenever a packet is dropped at 
a second-hop router, the work done by the first-hop router in forwarding a packet 
to the second-hop router ends up being “wasted.” The network would have been 
equally well off (more accurately, equally bad off) if the first router had simply 
discarded that packet and remained idle. More to the point, the transmission capac-
ity used at the first router to forward the packet to the second router could have 
been much more profitably used to transmit a different packet. (For example, when 
selecting a packet for transmission, it might be better for a router to give priority 
to packets that have already traversed some number of upstream routers.) So here 
we see yet another cost of dropping a packet due to congestion—when a packet 
is dropped along a path, the transmission capacity that was used at each of the 
upstream links to forward that packet to the point at which it is dropped ends up 
having been wasted.
R/2lout
l’in
Figure 3.48 /uni2666  Scenario 3 performance with finite buffers and multihop 
paths
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   261 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 290 ===
262     CHAPTER 3  •   TRANSPORT LAYER
3.6.2 Approaches to Congestion Control
In Section 3.7, we’ll examine TCP’s specific approach to congestion control in great 
detail. Here, we identify the two broad approaches to congestion control that are 
taken in practice and discuss specific network architectures and congestion-control 
protocols embodying these approaches.
At the highest level, we can distinguish among congestion-control approaches 
by whether the network layer provides explicit assistance to the transport layer for 
congestion-control purposes:
• End-to-end congestion control. In an end-to-end approach to congestion control, 
the network layer provides no explicit support to the transport layer for conges-
tion-control purposes. Even the presence of network congestion must be inferred 
by the end systems based only on observed network behavior (for example, packet 
loss and delay). We’ll see shortly in Section 3.7.1 that TCP takes this end-to-end 
approach toward congestion control, since the IP layer is not required to provide 
feedback to hosts regarding network congestion. TCP segment loss (as indicated 
by a timeout or the receipt of three duplicate acknowledgments) is taken as an 
indication of network congestion, and TCP decreases its window size accord-
ingly. We’ll also see a more recent proposal for TCP congestion control that 
uses increasing round-trip segment delay as an indicator of increased network  
congestion
• Network-assisted congestion control. With network-assisted congestion control, 
routers provide explicit feedback to the sender and/or receiver regarding the con-
gestion state of the network. This feedback may be as simple as a single bit indi-
cating congestion at a link—an approach taken in the early IBM SNA [Schwartz 
1982], DEC DECnet [Jain 1989; Ramakrishnan 1990] architectures, and ATM 
[Black 1995] network architectures. More sophisticated feedback is also possible. 
For example, in ATM Available Bite Rate (ABR) congestion control, a router 
informs the sender of the maximum host sending rate it (the router) can support 
on an outgoing link. As noted above, the Internet-default versions of IP and TCP 
adopt an end-to-end approach towards congestion control. We’ll see, however, 
in Section 3.7.2 that, more recently, IP and TCP may also optionally implement 
network-assisted congestion control.
For network-assisted congestion control, congestion information is typically 
fed back from the network to the sender in one of two ways, as shown in Fig -
ure/uni00A03.49. Direct feedback may be sent from a network router to the sender. This 
form of notification typically takes the form of a choke packet (essentially say-
ing, “I’m congested!”). The second and more common form of notification occurs 
when a router marks/updates a field in a packet flowing from sender to receiver to 
indicate congestion. Upon receipt of a marked packet, the receiver then notifies 
the sender of the congestion indication. This latter form of notification takes a full 
round-trip time.
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   262 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 291 ===
3.7  •   TCP CONGESTION C ONTROL     263
3.7  TCP Congestion Control
In this section, we return to our study of TCP. As we learned in Section 3.5, TCP provides 
a reliable transport service between two processes running on different hosts. Another key 
component of TCP is its congestion-control mechanism. As indicated in the previous sec-
tion, what we might refer to as “Classic”  TCP—the version of TCP standardized in [RFC 
2581] and most recently [RFC 5681]—uses end-to-end congestion control rather than 
network-assisted congestion control, since the IP layer provides no explicit feedback to 
the end systems regarding network congestion. We’ll first cover this “classic” version of 
TCP in depth in Section 7.3.1. In Section 7.3.2, we’ll then look at newer flavors of TCP 
that use an explicit congestion indication provided by the network layer, or differ a bit 
from “classic” TCP in any of several different ways. We’ll then cover the challenge of 
providing fairness among transport layer flows that must share a congested link.
3.7.1 Classic TCP Congestion Control
The approach taken by TCP is to have each sender limit the rate at which it sends traf-
fic into its connection as a function of perceived network congestion. If a TCP sender 
perceives that there is little congestion on the path between itself and the destination, 
then the TCP sender increases its send rate; if the sender perceives that there is conges-
tion along the path, then the sender reduces its send rate. But this approach raises three 
questions. First, how does a TCP sender limit the rate at which it sends traffic into its 
connection? Second, how does a TCP sender perceive that there is congestion on the 
path between itself and the destination? And third, what algorithm should the sender 
use to change its send rate as a function of perceived end-to-end congestion?
Host A
Network feedback via receiver
Direct network
feedback
Host B
Figure 3.49 /uni2666  Two feedback pathways for network-indicated congestion 
information
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   263 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 292 ===
264     CHAPTER 3  •   TRANSPORT LAYER
Let’s first examine how a TCP sender limits the rate at which it sends traffic into 
its connection. In Section 3.5, we saw that each side of a TCP connection consists of 
a receive buffer, a send buffer, and several variables (LastByteRead, rwnd, and 
so on). The TCP congestion-control mechanism operating at the sender keeps track 
of an additional variable, the congestion window. The congestion window, denoted 
cwnd, imposes a constraint on the rate at which a TCP sender can send traffic into 
the network. Specifically, the amount of unacknowledged data at a sender may not 
exceed the minimum of cwnd and rwnd, that is:
LastByteSent – LastByteAcked 
… min{cwnd, rwnd}
In order to focus on congestion control (as opposed to flow control), let us henceforth 
assume that the TCP receive buffer is so large that the receive-window constraint can 
be ignored; thus, the amount of unacknowledged data at the sender is solely limited 
by cwnd. We will also assume that the sender always has data to send, that is, that 
all segments in the congestion window are sent.
The constraint above limits the amount of unacknowledged data at the sender and 
therefore indirectly limits the sender’s send rate. To see this, consider a connection for 
which loss and packet transmission delays are negligible. Then, roughly, at the begin-
ning of every RTT, the constraint permits the sender to send cwnd bytes of data into the 
connection; at the end of the RTT the sender receives acknowledgments for the data. 
Thus the sender’s send rate is roughly cwnd/RTT bytes/sec. By adjusting the value of 
cwnd, the sender can therefore adjust the rate at which it sends data into its connection.
Let’s next consider how a TCP sender perceives that there is congestion on the 
path between itself and the destination. Let us define a “loss event” at a TCP sender 
as the occurrence of either a timeout or the receipt of three duplicate ACKs from the 
receiver. (Recall our discussion in Section 3.5.4 of the timeout event in Figure 3.33 
and the subsequent modification to include fast retransmit on receipt of three dupli-
cate ACKs.) When there is excessive congestion, then one (or more) router buffers 
along the path overflows, causing a datagram (containing a TCP segment) to be 
dropped. The dropped datagram, in turn, results in a loss event at the sender—either 
a timeout or the receipt of three duplicate ACKs—which is taken by the sender to be 
an indication of congestion on the sender-to-receiver path.
Having considered how congestion is detected, let’s next consider the more opti-
mistic case when the network is congestion-free, that is, when a loss event doesn’t 
occur. In this case, acknowledgments for previously unacknowledged segments 
will be received at the TCP sender. As we’ll see, TCP will take the arrival of these 
acknowledgments as an indication that all is well—that segments being transmitted 
into the network are being successfully delivered to the destination—and will use 
acknowledgments to increase its congestion window size (and hence its transmis-
sion rate). Note that if acknowledgments arrive at a relatively slow rate (e.g., if the 
end-end path has high delay or contains a low-bandwidth link), then the congestion 
window will be increased at a relatively slow rate. On the other hand, if acknowl-
edgments arrive at a high rate, then the congestion window will be increased more 
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   264 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 293 ===
3.7  •   TCP CONGESTION C ONTROL     265
quickly. Because TCP uses acknowledgments to trigger (or clock) its increase in 
congestion window size, TCP is said to be self-clocking.
Given the mechanism of adjusting the value of cwnd to control the sending rate, 
the critical question remains: How should a TCP sender determine the rate at which it 
should send? If TCP senders collectively send too fast, they can congest the network, 
leading to the type of congestion collapse that we saw in Figure 3.48. Indeed, the ver-
sion of TCP that we’ll study shortly was developed in response to observed Internet 
congestion collapse [Jacobson 1988] under earlier versions of TCP. However, if TCP 
senders are too cautious and send too slowly, they could under utilize the bandwidth 
in the network; that is, the TCP senders could send at a higher rate without congest-
ing the network. How then do the TCP senders determine their sending rates such 
that they don’t congest the network but at the same time make use of all the avail-
able bandwidth? Are TCP senders explicitly coordinated, or is there a distributed 
approach in which the TCP senders can set their sending rates based only on local 
information? TCP answers these questions using the following guiding principles:
• A lost segment implies congestion, and hence, the TCP sender’s rate should be 
decreased when a segment is lost. Recall from our discussion in Section 3.5.4, 
that a timeout event or the receipt of four acknowledgments for a given segment 
(one original ACK and then three duplicate ACKs) is interpreted as an implicit 
“loss event” indication of the segment following the quadruply ACKed segment, 
triggering a retransmission of the lost segment. From a congestion-control stand-
point, the question is how the TCP sender should decrease its congestion window 
size, and hence its sending rate, in response to this inferred loss event.
• An acknowledged segment indicates that the network is delivering the sender’s 
segments to the receiver, and hence, the sender’s rate can be increased when an 
ACK arrives for a previously unacknowledged segment. The arrival of acknowl-
edgments is taken as an implicit indication that all is well—segments are being 
successfully delivered from sender to receiver, and the network is thus not con-
gested. The congestion window size can thus be increased.
• Bandwidth probing. Given ACKs indicating a congestion-free source-to-destina-
tion path and loss events indicating a congested path, TCP’s strategy for adjusting 
its transmission rate is to increase its rate in response to arriving ACKs until a loss 
event occurs, at which point, the transmission rate is decreased. The TCP sender 
thus increases its transmission rate to probe for the rate that at which congestion 
onset begins, backs off from that rate, and then to begins probing again to see 
if the congestion onset rate has changed. The TCP sender’s behavior is perhaps 
analogous to the child who requests (and gets) more and more goodies until finally 
he/she is finally told “No!”, backs off a bit, but then begins making requests again 
shortly afterward. Note that there is no explicit signaling of congestion state by 
the network—ACKs and loss events serve as implicit signals—and that each TCP 
sender acts on local information asynchronously from other TCP senders.
Given this overview of TCP congestion control, we’re now in a position to consider the 
details of the celebrated TCP congestion-control algorithm, which was first described 
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   265 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 294 ===
266     CHAPTER 3  •   TRANSPORT LAYER
in [Jacobson 1988] and is standardized in [RFC 5681]. The algorithm has three major 
components: (1) slow start, (2) congestion avoidance, and (3) fast recovery. Slow start 
and congestion avoidance are mandatory components of TCP, differing in how they 
increase the size of cwnd in response to received ACKs. We’ll see shortly that slow 
start increases the size of cwnd more rapidly (despite its name!) than congestion avoid-
ance. Fast recovery is recommended, but not required, for TCP senders.
Slow Start
When a TCP connection begins, the value of cwnd is typically initialized to a small 
value of 1 MSS [RFC 3390], resulting in an initial sending rate of roughly MSS/
RTT. For example, if MSS /uni003D 500 bytes and RTT /uni003D 200 msec, the resulting initial  
sending rate is only about 20 kbps. Since the available bandwidth to the TCP sender 
may be much larger than MSS/RTT, the TCP sender would like to find the amount of 
available bandwidth quickly. Thus, in the slow-start state, the value of cwnd begins 
at 1 MSS and increases by 1 MSS every time a transmitted segment is first acknowl-
edged. In the example of Figure 3.50, TCP sends the first segment into the network 
Host A Host B
one segment
two segments
four segments
RTT
Time Time
Figure 3.50 /uni2666 TCP slow start
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   266 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 295 ===
3.7  •   TCP CONGESTION C ONTROL     267
and waits for an acknowledgment. When this acknowledgment arrives, the TCP 
sender increases the congestion window by one MSS and sends out two maximum-
sized segments. These segments are then acknowledged, with the sender increasing 
the congestion window by 1 MSS for each of the acknowledged segments, giving a 
congestion window of 4 MSS, and so on. This process results in a doubling of the 
sending rate every RTT. Thus, the TCP send rate starts slow but grows exponentially 
during the slow start phase.
But when should this exponential growth end? Slow start provides several 
answers to this question. First, if there is a loss event (i.e., congestion) indicated 
by a timeout, the TCP sender sets the value of cwnd to 1 and begins the slow start 
process anew. It also sets the value of a second state variable, ssthresh (short-
hand for “slow start threshold”) to cwnd/2—half of the value of the congestion 
window value when congestion was detected. The second way in which slow start 
may end is directly tied to the value of ssthresh. Since ssthresh is half the 
value of cwnd when congestion was last detected, it might be a bit reckless to keep 
doubling/uni00A0cwnd when it reaches or surpasses the value of ssthresh. Thus, when 
the value of cwnd equals ssthresh, slow start ends and TCP transitions into con-
gestion avoidance mode. As we’ll see, TCP increases cwnd more cautiously when 
in congestion-avoidance mode. The final way in which slow start can end is if three 
duplicate ACKs are detected, in which case TCP performs a fast retransmit (see Sec-
tion 3.5.4) and enters the fast recovery state, as discussed below. TCP’s behavior in 
slow start is summarized in the FSM description of TCP congestion control in Figure 
3.51. The slow-start algorithm traces it roots to [Jacobson 1988]; an approach similar 
to slow start was also proposed independently in [Jain 1986].
Congestion Avoidance
On entry to the congestion-avoidance state, the value of cwnd is approximately half 
its value when congestion was last encountered—congestion could be just around 
the corner! Thus, rather than doubling the value of cwnd every RTT, TCP adopts a 
more conservative approach and increases the value of cwnd by just a single MSS 
every RTT [RFC 5681]. This can be accomplished in several ways. A common 
approach is for the TCP sender to increase cwnd by MSS bytes (MSS/cwnd) when-
ever a new acknowledgment arrives. For example, if MSS is 1,460 bytes and cwnd 
is 14,600/uni00A0bytes, then 10 segments are being sent within an RTT. Each arriving ACK 
(assuming one ACK per segment) increases the congestion window size by 1/10 
MSS, and thus, the value of the congestion window will have increased by one MSS 
after ACKs when all 10 segments have been received.
But when should congestion avoidance’s linear increase (of 1 MSS per RTT) 
end? TCP’s congestion-avoidance algorithm behaves the same when a timeout occurs 
as in the case of slow start: The value of cwnd is set to 1 MSS, and the value of 
ssthresh is updated to half the value of cwnd when the loss event occurred. Recall, 
however, that a loss event also can be triggered by a triple duplicate ACK event.  
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   267 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 296 ===
268     CHAPTER 3  •   TRANSPORT LAYER
In this case, the network is continuing to deliver some segments from sender to receiver 
(as indicated by the receipt of duplicate ACKs). So TCP’s behavior to this type of loss 
event should be less drastic than with a timeout-indicated loss: TCP halves the value 
of cwnd (adding in 3 MSS for good measure to account for the triple duplicate ACKs 
received) and records the value of ssthresh to be half the value of cwnd when the 
triple duplicate ACKs were received. The fast-recovery state is then entered.
Fast Recovery
In fast recovery, the value of cwnd is increased by 1 MSS for every duplicate 
ACK received for the missing segment that caused TCP to enter the fast-recovery 
state. Eventually, when an ACK arrives for the missing segment, TCP enters the  
Slow
start
duplicate ACK
dupACKcount++
duplicate ACK
dupACKcount++
timeout
ssthresh=cwnd/2
cwnd=1 MSS
dupACKcount=0
cwnd=1 MSS
ssthresh=64 KB
dupACKcount=0
timeout
ssthresh=cwnd/2
cwnd=1
dupACKcount=0
timeout
ssthresh=cwnd/2
cwnd=1 MSS
dupACKcount=0
cwnd $ssthresh
Congestion
avoidance
Fast
recovery
new ACK
cwnd=cwnd+MSS •(MSS/cwnd)
dupACKcount=0
transmit new segment(s), as allowed
new ACK
cwnd=cwnd+MSS
dupACKcount=0
transmit new segment(s), as allowed
retransmit missing segment
retransmit missing segment dupACKcount==3
ssthresh=cwnd/2
cwnd=ssthresh+3•MSS
retransmit missing segment
duplicate ACK
cwnd=cwnd+MSS
transmit new segment(s), as allowed
dupACKcount==3
ssthresh=cwnd/2
cwnd=ssthresh+3•MSS
retransmit missing segment
retransmit missing segment
new ACK
cwnd=ssthresh
dupACKcount=0
L
L
Figure 3.51 /uni2666 FSM description of TCP congestion control
Examining the behavior 
of TCP
VideoNote
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   268 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 297 ===
3.7  •   TCP CONGESTION C ONTROL     269
congestion-avoidance state after deflating cwnd. If a timeout event occurs, fast 
recovery transitions to the slow-start state after performing the same actions as in 
slow start and congestion avoidance: The value of cwnd is set to 1 MSS, and the 
value of ssthresh is set to half the value of cwnd when the loss event occurred.
TCP SPLITTING: OPTIMIZING THE PERFORMANCE OF CLOUD SERVICES
For cloud services such as search, e-mail, and social networks, it is desirable to provide a 
high-level of responsiveness, ideally giving users the illusion that the services are running 
within their own end systems (including their smartphones). This can be a major challenge, 
as users are often located far away from the data centers responsible for serving the 
dynamic content associated with the cloud services. Indeed, if the end system is far from 
a data center, then the RTT will be large, potentially leading to poor response time perfor-
mance due to TCP slow start.
As a case study, consider the delay in receiving a response for a search query. 
Typically, the server requires three TCP windows during slow start to deliver the response 
[Pathak 2010]. Thus the time from when an end system initiates a TCP connection until the 
time when it receives the last packet of the response is roughly 4
# RTT (one RTT to set up 
the TCP connection plus three RTTs for the three windows of data) plus the processing time 
in the data center. These RTT delays can lead to a noticeable delay in returning search 
results for a significant fraction of queries. Moreover, there can be significant packet loss 
in access networks, leading to TCP retransmissions and even larger delays.
One way to mitigate this problem and improve user-perceived performance is to  
(1) deploy front-end servers closer to the users, and (2) utilize TCP splitting by break-
ing the TCP connection at the front-end server. With TCP splitting, the client establishes 
a TCP connection to the nearby front-end, and the front-end maintains a persistent TCP 
connection to the data center with a very large TCP congestion window [Tariq 2008, 
Pathak 2010, Chen 2011]. With this approach, the response time roughly becomes 
4 # RTTFE + RTTBE + processing time, where RTTFE is the round-trip time between client and 
front-end server, and RTTBE is the round-trip time between the front-end server and the data 
center (back-end server). If the front-end server is close to client, then this response time 
approximately becomes RTT plus processing time, since RTTFE is negligibly small and RTTBE 
is approximately RTT. In summary, TCP splitting can reduce the networking delay roughly 
from 4 # RTT to RTT, significantly improving user-perceived performance, particularly for 
users who are far from the nearest data center. TCP splitting also helps reduce TCP  
retransmission delays caused by losses in access networks. Google and Akamai have 
made extensive use of their CDN servers in access networks (recall our discussion in 
Section 2.6) to perform TCP splitting for the cloud services they support [Chen 2011].
PRINCIPLES IN PRACTICE
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   269 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 298 ===
270     CHAPTER 3  •   TRANSPORT LAYER
Fast recovery is a recommended, but not required, component of TCP [RFC 
5681]. It is interesting that an early version of TCP, known as TCP Tahoe, uncon-
ditionally cut its congestion window to 1 MSS and entered the slow-start phase after 
either a timeout-indicated or triple-duplicate-ACK-indicated loss event. The newer 
version of TCP, TCP Reno, incorporated fast recovery.
Figure 3.52 illustrates the evolution of TCP’s congestion window for both Reno 
and Tahoe. In this figure, the threshold is initially equal to 8 MSS. For the first 
eight transmission rounds, Tahoe and Reno take identical actions. The congestion 
window climbs exponentially fast during slow start and hits the threshold at the fourth 
round of transmission. The congestion window then climbs linearly until a triple 
duplicate- ACK event occurs, just after transmission round 8. Note that the congestion 
window is 12 
# MSS when this loss event occurs. The value of ssthresh is then set 
to 0.5 # cwnd = 6 # MSS. Under TCP Reno, the congestion window is set to cwnd =  
9 # MSS and then grows linearly. Under TCP Tahoe, the congestion window is set to 
1 MSS and grows exponentially until it reaches the value of ssthresh, at which 
point it grows linearly.
Figure 3.51 presents the complete FSM description of TCP’s congestion-control 
algorithms—slow start, congestion avoidance, and fast recovery. The figure also 
indicates where transmission of new segments or retransmitted segments can occur. 
Although it is important to distinguish between TCP error control/retransmission and 
TCP congestion control, it’s also important to appreciate how these two aspects of 
TCP are inextricably linked.
TCP Congestion Control: Retrospective
Having delved into the details of slow start, congestion avoidance, and fast recovery,  
it’s worthwhile to now step back and view the forest from the trees. Ignoring the 
0
102 34 56 78
Transmission round
TCP Tahoe
ssthresh
ssthresh
Congestion window
(in segments)
91 01 11 21 31 41 5
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
TCP Reno
Figure 3.52 /uni2666 Evolution of TCP’s congestion window (Tahoe and Reno)
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   270 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 299 ===
3.7  •   TCP CONGESTION C ONTROL     271
initial slow-start period when a connection begins and assuming that losses are indi-
cated by triple duplicate ACKs rather than timeouts, TCP’s congestion control con-
sists of linear (additive) increase in cwnd of 1 MSS per RTT and then a halving 
(multiplicative decrease) of cwnd on a triple duplicate-ACK event. For this reason, 
TCP congestion control is often referred to as an additive-increase, multiplicative-
decrease (AIMD) form of congestion control. AIMD congestion control gives rise 
to the “saw tooth” behavior shown in Figure 3.53, which also nicely illustrates our 
earlier intuition of TCP “probing” for bandwidth—TCP linearly increases its conges-
tion window size (and hence its transmission rate) until a triple duplicate-ACK event 
occurs. It then decreases its congestion window size by a factor of two but then again 
begins increasing it linearly, probing to see if there is additional available bandwidth.
TCP’s AIMD algorithm was developed based on a tremendous amount of 
engineering insight and experimentation with congestion control in operational  
networks. Ten years after TCP’s development, theoretical analyses showed that 
TCP’s congestion-control algorithm serves as a distributed asynchronous-optimization 
algorithm that results in several important aspects of user and network performance 
being simultaneously optimized [Kelly 1998]. A rich theory of congestion control 
has since been developed [Srikant 2012].
TCP Cubic
Given TCP Reno’s additive-increase, multiplicative-decrease approach to conges-
tion control, one might naturally wonder whether this is the best way to “probe” for a 
packet sending rate that is just below the threshold of triggering packet loss. Indeed, 
cutting the sending rate in half (or even worse, cutting the sending rate to one packet 
per RTT as in an earlier version of TCP known as TCP Tahoe) and then increasing 
rather slowly over time may be overly cautious. If the state of the  congested link 
24 K
16 K
8 K
Time
Congestion window
Figure 3.53 /uni2666 Additive-increase, multiplicative-decrease congestion control
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   271 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 300 ===
272     CHAPTER 3  •   TRANSPORT LAYER
where packet loss occurred hasn’t changed much, then perhaps it’s better to more 
quickly ramp up the sending rate to get close to the pre-loss sending rate and only 
then probe cautiously for bandwidth. This insight lies at the heart of a flavor of TCP 
known as TCP CUBIC [Ha 2008, RFC 8312].
TCP CUBIC differs only slightly from TCP Reno. Once again, the congestion 
window is increased only on ACK receipt, and the slow start and fast recovery phases 
remain the same. CUBIC only changes the congestion avoidance phase, as follows:
• Let W
max be size of TCP’s congestion control window when loss was last detected, 
and let K be the future point in time when TCP CUBIC’s window size will again reach 
Wmax, assuming no losses. Several tunable CUBIC parameters determine the value K, 
that is, how quickly the protocol’s congestion window size would reach Wmax.
• CUBIC increases the congestion window as a function of cube of the distance 
between the current time, t, and K. Thus, when t is further away from K, the 
congestion window size increases are much larger than when t is close to K. That 
is, CUBIC quickly ramps up TCP’s sending rate to get close to the pre-loss rate, 
Wmax, and only then probes cautiously for bandwidth as it approaches Wmax.
• When t is greater than K, the cubic rule implies that CUBIC’s congestion window 
increases are small when t is still close to K (which is good if the congestion 
level of the link causing loss hasn’t changed much) but then increases rapidly as 
t exceeds K (which allows CUBIC to more quickly find a new operating point if 
the congestion level of the link that caused loss has changed significantly).
Under these rules, the idealized performance of TCP Reno and TCP CUBIC are 
compared in Figure 3.54, adapted from [Huston 2017]. We see the slow start phase 
Time
TCP
sending
rate
TCP Reno
TCP CUBIC
Wmax
t0 t1 t2 t3 t4
Key:
Figure 3.54 /uni2666  TCP congestion avoidance sending rates: TCP Reno and 
TCP CUBIC
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   272 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 301 ===
3.7  •   TCP CONGESTION C ONTROL     273
ending at t0. Then, when congestion loss occurs at t1, t2, and t3, CUBIC more quickly 
ramps up close to Wmax (thereby enjoying more overall throughput than TCP Reno). 
We can see graphically how TCP CUBIC attempts to maintain the flow for as long 
as possible just below the (unknown to the sender) congestion threshold. Note that 
at t
3, the congestion level has presumably decreased appreciably, allowing both TCP 
Reno and TCP CUBIC to achieve sending rates higher than Wmax.
TCP CUBIC has recently gained wide deployment. While measurements 
taken around 2000 on popular Web servers showed that nearly all were running 
some  version of TCP Reno [Padhye 2001], more recent measurements of the 5000 
most popular Web servers shows that nearly 50% are running a version of TCP 
CUBIC [Yang 2014], which is also the default version of TCP used in the Linux 
operating system.
Macroscopic Description of TCP Reno Throughput
Given the saw-toothed behavior of TCP Reno, it’s natural to consider what the 
average throughput (that is, the average rate) of a long-lived TCP Reno connec-
tion might be. In this analysis, we’ll ignore the slow-start phases that occur after 
timeout events. (These phases are typically very short, since the sender grows out 
of the phase exponentially fast.) During a particular round-trip interval, the rate at 
which TCP sends data is a function of the congestion window and the current RTT. 
When the window size is w bytes and the current round-trip time is RTT second s, 
then TCP’s transmission rate is roughly w/RTT. TCP then probes for additional 
bandwidth by increasing w by 1 MSS each RTT until a loss event occurs. Denote by 
W the value of w when a loss event occurs. Assuming that RTT and W  are approxi-
mately constant over the duration of the connection, the TCP transmission rate 
ranges from W/(2 · RTT) to W/RTT.
These assumptions lead to a highly simplified macroscopic model for the steady-
state behavior of TCP. The network drops a packet from the connection when the rate 
increases to W/RTT; the rate is then cut in half and then increases by MSS/RTT every 
RTT until it again reaches W/RTT. This process repeats itself over and over again. 
Because TCP’s throughput (that is, rate) increases linearly between the two extreme 
values, we have
average throughput of a connection = 0.75 # W
RTT
Using this highly idealized model for the steady-state dynamics of TCP, we 
can also derive an interesting expression that relates a connection’s loss rate to its 
available bandwidth [Mathis 1997]. This derivation is outlined in the homework 
problems. A more sophisticated model that has been found empirically to agree with 
measured data is [Padhye 2000].
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   273 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 302 ===
274     CHAPTER 3  •   TRANSPORT LAYER
3.7.2  Network-Assisted Explicit Congestion Notification 
and Delayed-based Congestion Control
Since the initial standardization of slow start and congestion avoidance in the late 
1980’s [RFC 1122], TCP has implemented the form of end-end congestion control 
that we studied in Section 3.7.1: a TCP sender receives no explicit congestion indica-
tions from the network layer, and instead infers congestion through observed packet 
loss. More recently, extensions to both IP and TCP [RFC 3168] have been proposed, 
implemented, and deployed that allow the network to explicitly signal congestion to 
a TCP sender and receiver. In addition, a number of variations of TCP congestion 
control protocols have been proposed that infer congestion using measured packet 
delay. We’ll take a look at both network-assisted and delay-based congestion control 
in this section.
Explicit Congestion Notification
Explicit Congestion Notification [RFC 3168] is the form of network-assisted con -
gestion control performed within the Internet. As shown in Figure 3.55, both TCP 
and IP are involved. At the network layer, two bits (with four possible values, 
 overall) in the Type of Service field of the IP datagram header (which we’ll discuss 
in Section 4.3) are used for ECN.
One setting of the ECN bits is used by a router to indicate that it (the router) is 
experiencing congestion. This congestion indication is then carried in the marked 
IP datagram to the destination host, which then informs the sending host, as shown 
in Figure 3.55. RFC 3168 does not provide a definition of when a router is con-
gested; that decision is a configuration choice made possible by the router vendor, 
and decided by the network operator. However, the intuition is that the congestion 
indication bit can be set to signal the onset of congestion to the send before loss actu-
ally occurs. A second setting of the ECN bits is used by the sending host to inform 
routers that the sender and receiver are ECN-capable, and thus capable of taking 
action in response to ECN-indicated network congestion.
As shown in Figure 3.55, when the TCP in the receiving host receives an ECN 
congestion indication via a received datagram, the TCP in the receiving host informs 
the TCP in the sending host of the congestion indication by setting the ECE (Explicit 
Congestion Notification Echo) bit (see Figure 3.29) in a receiver-to-sender TCP 
ACK segment. The TCP sender, in turn, reacts to an ACK with a congestion indica-
tion by halving the congestion window, as it would react to a lost segment using fast 
retransmit, and sets the CWR (Congestion Window Reduced) bit in the header of the 
next transmitted TCP sender-to-receiver segment.
Other transport-layer protocols besides TCP may also make use of network-
layer-signaled ECN. The Datagram Congestion Control Protocol (DCCP) [RFC 
4340] provides a low-overhead, congestion-controlled UDP-like unreliable service 
that utilizes ECN. DCTCP (Data Center TCP) [Alizadeh 2010, RFC 8257] and 
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   274 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 303 ===
3.7  •   TCP CONGESTION C ONTROL     275
DCQCN (Data Center Quantized Congestion Notification) [Zhu 2015] designed 
 specifically for data center networks, also makes use of ECN. Recent Internet meas-
urements show increasing deployment of ECN capabilities in popular servers as well 
as in routers along paths to those servers [Kühlewind 2013].
Delay-based Congestion Control
Recall from our ECN discussion above that a congested router can set the congestion 
indication bit to signal congestion onset to senders before full buffers cause  packets 
to be dropped at that router. This allows senders to decrease their sending rates 
 earlier, hopefully before packet loss, thus avoiding costly packet loss and retrans-
mission. A second congestion-avoidance approach takes a delay-based approach to 
also proactively detect congestion onset before packet loss occurs.
In TCP Vegas [Brakmo 1995], the sender measures the RTT of the source-to-
destination path for all acknowledged packets. Let RTT
min be the minimum of these 
measurements at a sender; this occurs when the path is uncongested and packets 
experience minimal queueing delay. If TCP Vegas’ congestion window size is cwnd, 
then the uncongested throughput rate would be cwnd/RTT
min. The intuition behind 
TCP Vegas is that if the actual sender-measured throughput is close to this value, the 
TCP sending rate can be increased since (by definition and by measurement) the path 
is not yet congested. However, if the actual sender-measured throughput is signifi-
cantly less than the uncongested throughput rate, the path is congested and the Vegas 
TCP sender will decrease its sending rate. Details can be found in [Brakmo 1995].
ECN Echo = 1
Host A Host B
ECN = 11
ECN Echo bit set in 
receiver-to-sender
TCP ACK segment
ECN bits set in IP
datagram header
at congested router
Figure 3.55 /uni2666  Explicit Congestion Notification: network-assisted  
congestion control
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   275 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 304 ===
276     CHAPTER 3  •   TRANSPORT LAYER
TCP Vegas operates under the intuition that TCP senders should “Keep the pipe 
just full, but no fuller” [Kleinrock 2018]. “Keeping the pipe full” means that links 
(in particular the bottleneck link that is limiting a connection’s throughput) are kept 
busy transmitting, doing useful work; “but no fuller” means that there is nothing to 
gain (except increased delay!) if large queues are allowed to build up while the pipe 
is kept full.
The BBR congestion control protocol [Cardwell 2017] builds on ideas in TCP 
Vegas, and incorporates mechanisms that allows it compete fairly (see Section 3.7.3) 
with TCP non-BBR senders. [Cardwell 2017] reports that in 2016, Google began 
using BBR for all TCP traffic on its private B4 network [Jain 2013] that intercon-
nects Google data centers, replacing CUBIC. It is also being deployed on Google and 
YouTube Web servers. Other delay-based TCP congestion control protocols include 
TIMELY for data center networks [Mittal 2015], and Compound TCP (CTPC) [Tan 
2006] and FAST [Wei 2006] for high-speed and long distance networks.
3.7.3 Fairness
Consider K TCP connections, each with a different end-to-end path, but all pass-
ing through a bottleneck link with transmission rate R bps. (By bottleneck link, we 
mean that for each connection, all the other links along the connection’s path are not 
congested and have abundant transmission capacity as compared with the transmis-
sion capacity of the bottleneck link.) Suppose each connection is transferring a large 
file and there is no UDP traffic passing through the bottleneck link. A congestion-
control mechanism is said to be fair if the average transmission rate of each connec-
tion is approximately R/K; that is, each connection gets an equal share of the link  
bandwidth.
Is TCP’s AIMD algorithm fair, particularly given that different TCP connec-
tions may start at different times and thus may have different window sizes at a given 
point in time? [Chiu 1989] provides an elegant and intuitive explanation of why TCP 
congestion control converges to provide an equal share of a bottleneck link’s band-
width among competing TCP connections.
Let’s consider the simple case of two TCP connections sharing a single link 
with transmission rate R, as shown in Figure 3.55. Assume that the two connections 
have the same MSS and RTT (so that if they have the same congestion window size, 
then they have the same throughput), that they have a large amount of data to send, 
and that no other TCP connections or UDP datagrams traverse this shared link. Also, 
ignore the slow-start phase of TCP and assume the TCP connections are operating in 
CA mode (AIMD) at all times.
Figure 3.56 plots the throughput realized by the two TCP connections. If TCP is 
to share the link bandwidth equally between the two connections, then the realized 
throughput should fall along the 45-degree arrow (equal bandwidth share) emanat-
ing from the origin. Ideally, the sum of the two throughputs should equal R. (Cer-
tainly, each connection receiving an equal, but zero, share of the link capacity is not 
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   276 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 305 ===
3.7  •   TCP CONGESTION C ONTROL     277
a desirable situation!) So the goal should be to have the achieved throughputs fall 
somewhere near the intersection of the equal bandwidth share line and the full band-
width utilization line in Figure 3.56.
Suppose that the TCP window sizes are such that at a given point in time, con-
nections 1 and 2 realize throughputs indicated by point A in Figure 3.56. Because the 
amount of link bandwidth jointly consumed by the two connections is less than R, no 
loss will occur, and both connections will increase their window by 1 MSS per RTT 
as a result of TCP’s congestion-avoidance algorithm. Thus, the joint throughput of 
the two connections proceeds along a 45-degree line (equal increase for both connec-
tions) starting from point A. Eventually, the link bandwidth jointly consumed by the 
two connections will be greater than R, and eventually packet loss will occur. Sup-
pose that connections 1 and 2 experience packet loss when they realize throughputs 
indicated by point B. Connections 1 and 2 then decrease their windows by a factor of 
two. The resulting throughputs realized are thus at point C, halfway along a vector 
starting at B and ending at the origin. Because the joint bandwidth use is less than R 
at point C, the two connections again increase their throughputs along a 45-degree 
line starting from C. Eventually, loss will again occur, for example, at point D, and 
the two connections again decrease their window sizes by a factor of two, and so on. 
You should convince yourself that the bandwidth realized by the two connections 
eventually fluctuates along the equal bandwidth share line. You should also convince 
yourself that the two connections will converge to this behavior regardless of where 
they are in the two-dimensional space! Although a number of idealized assumptions 
lie behind this scenario, it still provides an intuitive feel for why TCP results in an 
equal sharing of bandwidth among connections.
In our idealized scenario, we assumed that only TCP connections traverse the 
bottleneck link, that the connections have the same RTT value, and that only a 
 single TCP connection is associated with a host-destination pair. In practice, these 
 conditions are typically not met, and client-server applications can thus obtain very 
unequal portions of link bandwidth. In particular, it has been shown that when 
TCP connection 2
TCP connection 1
Bottleneck
router capacity R
Figure 3.56 /uni2666 Two TCP connections sharing a single bottleneck link
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   277 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 306 ===
278     CHAPTER 3  •   TRANSPORT LAYER
multiple connections share a common bottleneck, those sessions with a smaller RTT 
are able to grab the available bandwidth at that link more quickly as it becomes free 
(that is, open their congestion windows faster) and thus will enjoy higher throughput 
than those connections with larger RTTs [Lakshman 1997].
Fairness and UDP
We have just seen how TCP congestion control regulates an application’s trans-
mission rate via the congestion window mechanism. Many multimedia applications, 
such as Internet phone and video conferencing, often do not run over TCP for this 
very reason—they do not want their transmission rate throttled, even if the network 
is very congested. Instead, these applications prefer to run over UDP, which does 
not have built-in congestion control. When running over UDP, applications can 
pump their audio and video into the network at a constant rate and occasionally lose 
packets, rather than reduce their rates to “fair” levels at times of congestion and not 
lose any packets. From the perspective of TCP, the multimedia applications running 
over UDP are not being fair—they do not cooperate with the other connections nor 
adjust their transmission rates appropriately. Because TCP congestion control will 
decrease its transmission rate in the face of increasing congestion (loss), while UDP 
sources need not, it is possible for UDP sources to crowd out TCP traffic. A number 
R
R
Equal
bandwidth
share
Connection 1 throughput
Connection 2 throughput
D
B
C
A
Full bandwidth
utilization line
Figure 3.57 /uni2666 Throughput realized by TCP connections 1 and 2
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   278 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 307 ===
3.8  •   EV OLUTION OF TRANSPORT -LAYER FUNCTIONALITY     279
of congestion-control mechanisms have been proposed for the Internet that prevent 
UDP traffic from bringing the Internet’s throughput to a grinding halt [Floyd 1999; 
Floyd 2000; Kohler 2006; RFC 4340].
Fairness and Parallel TCP Connections
But even if we could force UDP traffic to behave fairly, the fairness problem would 
still not be completely solved. This is because there is nothing to stop a TCP-based 
application from using multiple parallel connections. For example, Web browsers 
often use multiple parallel TCP connections to transfer the multiple objects within 
a Web page. (The exact number of multiple connections is configurable in most 
browsers.) When an application uses multiple parallel connections, it gets a larger 
fraction of the bandwidth in a congested link. As an example, consider a link of rate 
R supporting nine ongoing client-server applications, with each of the applications 
using one TCP connection. If a new application comes along and also uses one TCP 
connection, then each application gets approximately the same transmission rate of 
R/10. But if this new application instead uses 11 parallel TCP connections, then the 
new application gets an unfair allocation of more than R/2. Because Web traffic is so 
pervasive in the Internet, multiple parallel connections are not uncommon.
3./eight.taboldstyle Evolution of Transport-Layer Functionality
Our discussion of specific Internet transport protocols in this chapter has focused on 
UDP and TCP—the two “work horses” of the Internet transport layer. However, as 
we’ve seen, three decades of experience with these two protocols has identified cir-
cumstances in which neither is ideally suited, and so the design and implementation 
of transport layer functionality has continued to evolve.
We’ve seen a rich evolution in the use of TCP over the past decade. In 
 Sections 3.7.1 and 3.7.2, we learned that in addition to “classic” versions of TCP 
such as TCP Tahoe and Reno, there are now several newer versions of TCP that have 
been developed, implemented, deployed, and are in significant use today. These 
include TCP CUBIC, DCTCP, CTCP, BBR, and more. Indeed, measurements in 
[Yang 2014] indicate that CUBIC (and its predecessor, BIC [Xu 2004]) and CTCP 
are more widely deployed on Web servers than classic TCP Reno; we also saw that 
BBR is being deployed in Google’s internal B4 network, as well as on many of 
Google’s public-facing servers.
And there are many (many!) more versions of TCP! There are versions of TCP 
specifically designed for use over wireless links, over high-bandwidth paths with 
large RTTs, for paths with packet re-ordering, and for short paths strictly within data 
centers. There are versions of TCP that implement different priorities among TCP 
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   279 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 308 ===
280     CHAPTER 3  •   TRANSPORT LAYER
connections competing for bandwidth at a bottleneck link, and for TCP connections 
whose segments are being sent over different source-destination paths in parallel. 
There are also variations of TCP that deal with packet acknowledgment and TCP 
session establishment/closure differently than we studied in Section 3.5.6. Indeed, 
it’s probably not even correct anymore to refer to “the” TCP protocol; perhaps the 
only common features of these protocols is that they use the TCP segment format that 
we studied in Figure 3.29, and that they should compete “fairly” amongst themselves 
in the face of network congestion! For a survey of the many flavors of TCP, see 
 [Afanasyev 2010] and [Narayan 2018].
QUIC: Quick UDP Internet Connections
If the transport services needed by an application don’t quite fit either the UDP 
or TCP service models—perhaps an application needs more services than those 
provided by UDP but does not want all of the particular functionality that comes 
with TCP, or may want different services than those provided by TCP—applica-
tion designers can always “roll their own” protocol at the application layer. This 
is the approach taken in the QUIC (Quick UDP Internet Connections) protocol 
[Langley 2017, QUIC 2020]. Specifically, QUIC is a new application-layer pro-
tocol designed from the ground up to improve the performance of transport-layer 
services for secure HTTP. QUIC has already been widely deployed, although is 
still in the process of being standardized as an Internet RFC [QUIC 2020]. Google 
has deployed QUIC on many of its public-facing Web servers, in its mobile video 
streaming YouTube app, in its Chrome browser, and in Android’s Google Search 
app. With more than 7% of Internet traffic today now being QUIC [Langley 2017], 
we’ll want to take a closer look. Our study of QUIC will also serve as a nice culmi-
nation of our study of the transport layer, as QUIC uses many of the approaches for 
reliable data transfer, congestion control, and connection management that we’ve 
studied in this chapter.
As shown in Figure 3.58, QUIC is an application-layer protocol, using UDP as 
its underlying transport-layer protocol, and is designed to interface above specifi-
cally to a simplified but evolved version of HTTP/2. In the near future, HTTP/3 
will natively incorporate QUIC [HTTP/3 2020]. Some of QUIC’s major features 
include:
• Connection-Oriented and Secure. Like TCP, QUIC is a connection-oriented 
protocol between two endpoints. This requires a handshake between endpoints 
to/uni00A0set up the QUIC connection state. Two pieces of connection state are the 
source and destination connection ID. All QUIC packets are encrypted, and as 
suggested in Figure 3.58, QUIC combines the handshakes needed to establish 
connection state with those needed for authentication and encryption (transport 
layer security topics that we’ll study in Chapter 8), thus providing faster estab-
lishment than the protocol stack in Figure 3.58(a), where multiple RTTs are 
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   280 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 309 ===
3.8  •   EV OLUTION OF TRANSPORT -LAYER FUNCTIONALITY     281
required to first establish a TCP connection, and then establish a TLS connection 
over the TCP connection.
• Streams. QUIC allows several different application-level “streams” to be mul -
tiplexed through a single QUIC connection, and once a QUIC connection is 
established, new streams can be quickly added. A stream is an abstraction for the 
reliable, in-order bi-directional delivery of data between two QUIC endpoints. In  
the context of HTTP/3, there would be a different stream  for each object in a Web 
page. Each connection has a connection ID, and each stream within a connection 
has a stream ID; both of these IDs are contained in a QUIC packet header (along 
with other header information). Data from multiple streams may be contained 
within a single QUIC segment, which is carried over UDP. The Stream Control 
Transmission Protocol (SCTP) [RFC 4960, RFC 3286] is an earlier reliable, mes-
sage-oriented protocol that pioneered the notion of multiplexing multiple appli -
cation-level “streams” through a single SCTP connection. We’ll see in Chapter 7 
that SCTP is used in  control plane protocols in 4G/5G cellular wireless networks.
• Reliable, TCP-friendly congestion-controlled data transfer. As illustrated 
in Figure 3.59(b), QUIC provides reliable data transfer to each QUIC stream 
separately. Figure 3.59(a) shows the case of HTTP/1.1 sending multiple HTTP 
requests, all over a single TCP connection. Since TCP provides reliable, in-order 
byte delivery, this means that the multiple HTTP requests must be delivered in-
order at the destination HTTP server. Thus, if bytes from one HTTP request are 
lost, the remaining HTTP requests can not be delivered until those lost bytes are 
retransmitted and correctly received by TCP at the HTTP server—the so-called 
HOL blocking problem that we encountered earlier in Section 2.2.5. Since QUIC 
provides a reliable in-order delivery on a per-stream basis, a lost UDP segment 
only impacts those streams whose data was carried in that segment; HTTP mes-
sages in other streams can continue to be received and delivered to the applica-
tion. QUIC provides reliable data transfer using acknowledgment mechanisms 
similar to TCP’s, as specified in [RFC 5681].
IP
TCP
TLS
HTTP/2
IP
UDP
QUIC
HTTP/2 (slimmed)
Network
Transport
Application HTTP/3
a. b.
Figure 3.58 /uni2666  (a) traditional secure HTTP protocol stack, and the 
(b) secure QUIC-based HTTP/3 protocol stack
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   281 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 310 ===
282     CHAPTER 3  •   TRANSPORT LAYER
 QUIC’s congestion control is based on TCP NewReno [RFC 6582], a slight 
modification to the TCP Reno protocol that we studied in Section 3.7.1. QUIC’s 
Draft specification [QUIC-recovery 2020] notes “Readers familiar with TCP’s 
loss detection and congestion control will find algorithms here that parallel well-
known TCP ones.” Since we’ve carefully studied TCP’s congestion control in 
Section 3.7.1, we’d be right at home reading the details of QUIC’s draft specifica-
tion of its congestion control algorithm!
In closing, it’s worth highlighting again that QUIC is an application-layer 
 protocol providing reliable, congestion-controlled data transfer between two 
 endpoints. The authors of QUIC [Langley 2017] stress that this means that changes 
can be made to QUIC at “application-update timescales,” that is, much faster than 
TCP or UDP update timescales.
3.9  Summary
We began this chapter by studying the services that a transport-layer protocol can 
provide to network applications. At one extreme, the transport-layer protocol can be 
very simple and offer a no-frills service to applications, providing only a multiplexing/
demultiplexing function for communicating processes. The Internet’s UDP  protocol 
TLS encryption 
TCP RDT
TCP CC
TCP RDT
TCP CC
TLS encryption 
HTTP
request
HTTP
request HTTP
request
QUIC congestion control 
QUIC
encryption
QUIC
encryption
QUIC
encryption
QUIC RDT QUIC RDT QUIC RDT
HTTP
request
HTTP
request
HTTP
request
QUIC congestion control 
QUIC
encryption
QUIC
encryption
QUIC
encryption
QUIC RDT QUIC RDT QUIC RDT
UDP UDP
Transport Application
a.  HTTP 1.1 b.  HTTP/3
HTTP
request
HTTP
request
HTTP
request
HTTP
request
HTTP
request
HTTP
request
Figure 3.59 /uni2666  (a) HTTP/1.1: a single-connection client and server using application-level TLS 
encryption over TCP’s reliable data transfer (RDT) and congestion control (CC) 
(b)/uni00A0HTTP/3: a  multi-stream client and server using QUIC’s encryption, reliable 
data transfer and congestion  control over UDP’s unreliable datagram service
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   282 12/02/20   3:46 PM
=== PAGE 311 ===
3.9  •   SUMMARY     283
is an example of such a no-frills transport-layer protocol. At the other extreme, a 
 transport-layer  protocol can provide a variety of guarantees to applications, such as 
reliable delivery of data, delay guarantees, and bandwidth guarantees. Nevertheless, 
the services that a transport protocol can provide are often constrained by the service 
model of the underlying network-layer protocol. If the network-layer protocol cannot 
provide delay or bandwidth guarantees to transport-layer segments, then the transport-
layer protocol cannot provide delay or bandwidth guarantees for the messages sent 
between processes.
We learned in Section 3.4 that a transport-layer protocol can provide reliable 
data transfer even if the underlying network layer is unreliable. We saw that provid-
ing reliable data transfer has many subtle points, but that the task can be accom-
plished by carefully combining acknowledgments, timers, retransmissions, and 
sequence numbers.
Although we covered reliable data transfer in this chapter, we should keep 
in mind that reliable data transfer can be provided by link-, network-, transport-, 
or application-layer protocols. Any of the upper four layers of the protocol 
stack can implement acknowledgments, timers, retransmissions, and sequence 
numbers and provide reliable data transfer to the layer above. In fact, over 
the years, engineers and computer scientists have independently designed and 
implemented link-, network-, transport-, and application-layer protocols that 
provide reliable data transfer (although many of these protocols have quietly 
disappeared).
In Section 3.5, we took a close look at TCP, the Internet’s connection-oriented 
and reliable transport-layer protocol. We learned that TCP is complex, involving con-
nection management, flow control, and round-trip time estimation, as well as reli-
able data transfer. In fact, TCP is actually more complex than our description—we 
intentionally did not discuss a variety of TCP patches, fixes, and improvements that 
are widely implemented in various versions of TCP. All of this complexity, however, 
is hidden from the network application. If a client on one host wants to send data 
reliably to a server on another host, it simply opens a TCP socket to the server and 
pumps data into that socket. The client-server application is blissfully unaware of 
TCP’s complexity.
In Section 3.6, we examined congestion control from a broad perspective, and 
in Section 3.7, we showed how TCP implements congestion control. We learned that 
congestion control is imperative for the well-being of the network. Without conges-
tion control, a network can easily become gridlocked, with little or no data being 
transported end-to-end. In Section 3.7, we learned that classic TCP implements an 
end-to-end congestion-control mechanism that additively increases its transmission 
rate when the TCP connection’s path is judged to be congestion-free, and multiplica-
tively decreases its transmission rate when loss occurs. This mechanism also strives 
to give each TCP connection passing through a congested link an equal share of the 
link bandwidth. We also studied several newer variations of TCP congestion control 
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   283 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 312 ===
284     CHAPTER 3  •   TRANSPORT LAYER
that try to determine TCP’s sending rate rate more quickly than classic TCP, use a 
delay-based approach or explicit congestion notification from the network (rather 
than a loss-based approach) to determine TCP’s sending rate. We also examined in 
some depth the impact of TCP connection establishment and slow start on latency. 
We observed that in many important scenarios, connection establishment and slow 
start significantly contribute to end-to-end delay. We emphasize once more that 
while TCP congestion control has evolved over the years, it remains an area of 
intensive research and will likely continue to evolve in the upcoming years. To 
wrap up this chapter, in Section 3.8, we studied recent developments in implement-
ing many of the transport layer’s functions—reliable data transfer, congestion con-
trol, connection establishment, and more—in the application layer using the QUIC 
protocol.
In Chapter 1, we said that a computer network can be partitioned into the 
 “network edge” and the “network core.” The network edge covers everything 
that happens in the end systems. Having now covered the application layer and 
the t ransport layer, our discussion of the network edge is complete. It is time to 
explore the network core! This journey begins in the next two chapters, where 
we’ll study the network layer, and continues into Chapter 6, where we’ll study the 
link layer.
Homework Problems and Questions
Chapter 3 Review Questions
SECTIONS 3.1–3.3 
 R1. Suppose the network layer provides the following service. The network 
layer in the source host accepts a segment of maximum size 1,200 bytes and 
a destination host address from the transport layer. The network layer then 
guarantees to deliver the segment to the transport layer at the destination 
host. Suppose many network application processes can be running at the 
destination host.
a. Design the simplest possible transport-layer protocol that will get applica-
tion data to the desired process at the destination host. Assume the operat-
ing system in the destination host has assigned a 4-byte port number to 
each running application process.
b. Modify this protocol so that it provides a “return address” to the destina-
tion process.
c. In your protocols, does the transport layer “have to do anything” in the 
core of the computer network?
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   284 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 313 ===
 R2. Consider a planet where everyone belongs to a family of six, every family 
lives in its own house, each house has a unique address, and each person 
in a given house has a unique name. Suppose this planet has a mail service 
that delivers letters from source house to destination house. The mail service 
requires that (1) the letter be in an envelope, and that (2) the address of the 
destination house (and nothing more) be clearly written on the envelope. Sup-
pose each family has a delegate family member who collects and distributes 
letters for the other family members. The letters do not necessarily provide 
any indication of the recipients of the letters.
a. Using the solution to Problem R1 above as inspiration, describe a protocol 
that the delegates can use to deliver letters from a sending family member 
to a receiving family member.
b. In your protocol, does the mail service ever have to open the envelope and 
examine the letter in order to provide its service?
 R3. Consider a TCP connection between Host A and Host B. Suppose that the 
TCP segments traveling from Host A to Host B have source port number x 
and destination port number y. What are the source and destination port num-
bers for the segments traveling from Host B to Host A?
 R4. Describe why an application developer might choose to run an application 
over UDP rather than TCP.
 R5. Why is it that voice and video traffic is often sent over TCP rather than UDP 
in today’s Internet? (Hint: The answer we are looking for has nothing to do 
with TCP’s congestion-control mechanism.)
 R6. Is it possible for an application to enjoy reliable data transfer even when the 
application runs over UDP? If so, how?
 R7. Suppose a process in Host C has a UDP socket with port number 6789. 
Suppose both Host A and Host B each send a UDP segment to Host C with 
destination port number 6789. Will both of these segments be directed to the 
same socket at Host C? If so, how will the process at Host C know that these 
two segments originated from two different hosts?
 R8. Suppose that a Web server runs in Host C on port 80. Suppose this Web 
server uses persistent connections, and is currently receiving requests from 
two different Hosts, A and B. Are all of the requests being sent through the 
same socket at Host C? If they are being passed through different sockets, do 
both of the sockets have port 80? Discuss and explain.
SECTION 3.4
 R9. In our rdt protocols, why did we need to introduce sequence numbers?
 R10. In our rdt protocols, why did we need to introduce timers?
HOMEWORK PROB LEMS AND  QUESTIONS     285
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   285 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 314 ===
286     CHAPTER 3  •   TRANSPORT LAYER
 R11. Suppose that the roundtrip delay between sender and receiver is constant and 
known to the sender. Would a timer still be necessary in protocol rdt 3.0, 
assuming that packets can be lost? Explain.
 R12. Visit the Go-Back-N interactive animation at the companion Web site.
a. Have the source send five packets, and then pause the animation before 
any of the five packets reach the destination. Then kill the first packet and 
resume the animation. Describe what happens.
b. Repeat the experiment, but now let the first packet reach the destination 
and kill the first acknowledgment. Describe again what happens.
c. Finally, try sending six packets. What happens?
 R13. Repeat R12, but now with the Selective Repeat interactive animation. How 
are Selective Repeat and Go-Back-N different?
SECTION 3.5
 R14. True or false?
a. Host A is sending Host B a large file over a TCP connection. Assume Host 
B has no data to send Host A. Host B will not send acknowledgments to 
Host A because Host B cannot piggyback the acknowledgments on data.
b. The size of the TCP rwnd never changes throughout the duration of the 
connection.
c. Suppose Host A is sending Host B a large file over a TCP connection. The 
number of unacknowledged bytes that A sends cannot exceed the size of 
the receive buffer.
d. Suppose Host A is sending a large file to Host B over a TCP connection. 
If the sequence number for a segment of this connection is m, then the 
sequence number for the subsequent segment will necessarily be 
m + 1.
e. The TCP segment has a field in its header for rwnd.
f. Suppose that the last SampleRTT in a TCP connection is equal to 1 sec. 
The current value of TimeoutInterval for the connection will neces-
sarily be 
Ú  1 sec.
g. Suppose Host A sends one segment with sequence number 38 and 4 
bytes of data over a TCP connection to Host B. In this same segment, the 
acknowledgment number is necessarily 42.
 R15. Suppose Host A sends two TCP segments back to back to Host B over a 
TCP connection. The first segment has sequence number 90; the second has 
sequence number 110.
a. How much data is in the first segment?
b. Suppose that the first segment is lost but the second segment arrives at 
B. In the acknowledgment that Host B sends to Host A, what will be the 
acknowledgment number?
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   286 11/02/20   12:15 PM
=== PAGE 315 ===
PROBLEMS     287
 R16. Consider the Telnet example discussed in Section 3.5. A few seconds after 
the user types the letter ‘C,’ the user types the letter ‘R.’ After typing the let-
ter ‘R,’ how many segments are sent, and what is put in the sequence number 
and acknowledgment fields of the segments?
SECTION 3.7
 R17. Suppose two TCP connections are present over some bottleneck link of rate R 
bps. Both connections have a huge file to send (in the same direction over the 
bottleneck link). The transmissions of the files start at the same time. What 
transmission rate would TCP like to give to each of the connections?
 R18. True or false? Consider congestion control in TCP. When the timer expires at 
the sender, the value of ssthresh is set to one half of its previous value.
 R19. In the discussion of TCP splitting in the sidebar in Section 3.7, it was 
claimed that the response time with TCP splitting is approximately 
4 # RTTFE + RTTBE + processing time. Justify this claim.
Problems
 P1. Suppose Client A initiates a Telnet session with Server S. At about the same 
time, Client B also initiates a Telnet session with Server S. Provide possible 
source and destination port numbers for
a. The segments sent from A to S.
b. The segments sent from B to S.
c. The segments sent from S to A.
d. The segments sent from S to B.
e. If A and B are different hosts, is it possible that the source port number in 
the segments from A to S is the same as that from B to S?
f. How about if they are the same host?
 P2. Consider Figure 3.5. What are the source and destination port values in the 
segments flowing from the server back to the clients’ processes? What are 
the IP addresses in the network-layer datagrams carrying the transport-layer 
segments?
 P3. UDP and TCP use 1s complement for their checksums. Suppose you have 
the following three 8-bit bytes: 01010011, 01100110, 01110100. What is the 
1s complement of the sum of these 8-bit bytes? (Note that although UDP and 
TCP use 16-bit words in computing the checksum, for this problem you are 
being asked to consider 8-bit sums.) Show all work. Why is it that UDP takes 
the 1s complement of the sum; that is, why not just use the sum? With the 1s 
complement scheme, how does the receiver detect errors? Is it possible that a 
1-bit error will go undetected? How about a 2-bit error?
M03_KURO1557_08_SE_C03.indd   287 12/02/20   4:08 PM
