
Page number: 1

Page number: 2
I n t r o d u c t i o n  t o  A l g o r i t h m s
Fourth Edition
Page number: 3
Thomas H. Cormen
Charles E. Leiserson
Ronald L. Rivest
Clif ford Stein
I n t r o d u c t i o n  t o  A l g o r i t h m s
Fourth Edition
The MIT Press
Cambridge, Massachusetts London, England
Page number: 4
© 2022 Massachusetts Institute of T echnology
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic or
mechanical means (including photocopying, recording, or information storage and retrieval) without
permission in writing from the publisher .
The MIT Press would like to thank the anonymous peer reviewers who provided comments on drafts
of this book. The generous work of academic experts is essential for establishing the authority and
quality of our publications. W e acknowledge with gratitude the contributions of these otherwise
uncredited readers.
Names: Cormen, Thomas H., author . | Leiserson, Charles Eric, author . | Rivest, Ronald L., author . |
Stein, Clif ford, author .
T itle: Introduction to algorithms / Thomas H. Cormen, Charles E. Leiserson, Ronald L. Rivest,
Clif ford Stein.
Description: Fourth edition. | Cambridge, Massachusetts : The MIT Press, [2022] | Includes
bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2021037260 | ISBN 9780262367509
Subjects: LCSH: Computer programming. | Computer algorithms.
Classification: LCC QA76.6 .C662 2022 | DDC 005.13--dc23
LC record available at http://lccn.loc.gov/2021037260
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
d_r0
Page number: 5
Contents
Copyright
Pr eface
I        Foundations
Intr oduction
1      The Role of Algorithms in Computing
1.1      Algorithms
1.2      Algorithms as a technology
2      Getting Started
2.1      Insertion sort
2.2      Analyzing algorithms
2.3      Designing algorithms
3      Characterizing Running T imes
3.1      O -notation, Ω-notation, and Θ-notation
3.2      Asymptotic notation: formal definitions
3.3      Standard notations and common functions
4      Divide-and-Conquer
4.1      Multiplying square matrices
4.2      Strassen’ s algorithm for matrix multiplication
4.3      The substitution method for solving recurrences
4.4      The recursion-tree method for solving recurrences
4.5      The master method for solving recurrences
 ★      4.6      Proof of the continuous master theorem
 ★      4.7      Akra-Bazzi recurrences
Page number: 6
5      Pr obabilistic Analysis and Randomized Algorithms
5.1      The hiring problem
5.2      Indicator random variables
5.3      Randomized algorithms
 ★      5.4      Probabilistic analysis and further uses of
indicator random variables
II      Sorting and Order Statistics
Intr oduction
6      Heapsort
6.1      Heaps
6.2      Maintaining the heap property
6.3      Building a heap
6.4      The heapsort algorithm
6.5      Priority queues
7      Quicksort
7.1      Description of quicksort
7.2      Performance of quicksort
7.3      A randomized version of quicksort
7.4      Analysis of quicksort
8      Sorting in Linear T ime
8.1      Lower bounds for sorting
8.2      Counting sort
8.3      Radix sort
8.4      Bucket sort
9      Medians and Order Statistics
9.1      Minimum and maximum
9.2      Selection in expected linear time
9.3      Selection in worst-case linear time
III     Data Structures
Intr oduction
10    Elementary Data Structur es
Page number: 7
10.1    Simple array-based data structures: arrays,
matrices, stacks, queues
10.2    Linked lists
10.3    Representing rooted trees
1 1    Hash T ables
1 1.1    Direct-address tables
1 1.2    Hash tables
1 1.3    Hash functions
1 1.4    Open addressing
1 1.5    Practical considerations
12    Binary Sear ch T r ees
12.1    What is a binary search tree?
12.2    Querying a binary search tree
12.3    Insertion and deletion
13    Red-Black T r ees
13.1    Properties of red-black trees
13.2    Rotations
13.3    Insertion
13.4    Deletion
IV      Advanced Design and Analysis T echniques
Intr oduction
14    Dynamic Pr ogramming
14.1    Rod cutting
14.2    Matrix-chain multiplication
14.3    Elements of dynamic programming
14.4    Longest common subsequence
14.5    Optimal binary search trees
15    Gr eedy Algorithms
15.1    An activity-selection problem
15.2    Elements of the greedy strategy
15.3    Huf fman codes
15.4    Of fline caching
16    Amortized Analysis
Page number: 8
16.1    Aggregate analysis
16.2    The accounting method
16.3    The potential method
16.4    Dynamic tables
V       Advanced Data Structures
Intr oduction
17    Augmenting Data Structur es
17.1    Dynamic order statistics
17.2    How to augment a data structure
17.3    Interval trees
18    B-T r ees
18.1    Definition of B-trees
18.2    Basic operations on B-trees
18.3    Deleting a key from a B-tree
19    Data Structur es for Disjoint Sets
19.1    Disjoint-set operations
19.2    Linked-list representation of disjoint sets
19.3    Disjoint-set forests
 ★      19.4    Analysis of union by rank with path compression
VI     Graph Algorithms
Intr oduction
20    Elementary Graph Algorithms
20.1    Representations of graphs
20.2    Breadth-first search
20.3    Depth-first search
20.4    T opological sort
20.5    Strongly connected components
21    Minimum Spanning T r ees
21.1    Growing a minimum spanning tree
21.2    The algorithms of Kruskal and Prim
22    Single-Sour ce Shortest Paths
Page number: 9
22.1    The Bellman-Ford algorithm
22.2    Single-source shortest paths in directed acyclic
graphs
22.3    Dijkstra’ s algorithm
22.4    Dif ference constraints and shortest paths
22.5    Proofs of shortest-paths properties
23    All-Pairs Shortest Paths
23.1    Shortest paths and matrix multiplication
23.2    The Floyd-W arshall algorithm
23.3    Johnson’ s algorithm for sparse graphs
24    Maximum Flow
24.1    Flow networks
24.2    The Ford-Fulkerson method
24.3    Maximum bipartite matching
25    Matchings in Bipartite Graphs
25.1    Maximum bipartite matching (revisited)
25.2    The stable-marriage problem
25.3    The Hungarian algorithm for the assignment
problem
VII   Selected T opics
Intr oduction
26    Parallel Algorithms
26.1    The basics of fork-join parallelism
26.2    Parallel matrix multiplication
26.3    Parallel mer ge sort
27    Online Algorithms
27.1    W aiting for an elevator
27.2    Maintaining a search list
27.3    Online caching
28    Matrix Operations
28.1    Solving systems of linear equations
28.2    Inverting matrices
Page number: 10
28.3    Symmetric positive-definite matrices and least-
squares approximation
29    Linear Pr ogramming
29.1    Linear programming formulations and algorithms
29.2    Formulating problems as linear programs
29.3    Duality
30    Polynomials and the FFT
30.1    Representing polynomials
30.2    The DFT and FFT
30.3    FFT circuits
31    Number -Theor etic Algorithms
31.1    Elementary number -theoretic notions
31.2    Greatest common divisor
31.3    Modular arithmetic
31.4    Solving modular linear equations
31.5    The Chinese remainder theorem
31.6    Powers of an element
31.7    The RSA public-key cryptosystem
 ★      31.8    Primality testing
32    String Matching
32.1    The naive string-matching algorithm
32.2    The Rabin-Karp algorithm
32.3    String matching with finite automata
 ★      32.4    The Knuth-Morris-Pratt algorithm
32.5    Suf fix arrays
33    Machine-Learning Algorithms
33.1    Clustering
33.2    Multiplicative-weights algorithms
33.3    Gradient descent
34    NP-Completeness
34.1    Polynomial time
34.2    Polynomial-time verification
34.3    NP-completeness and reducibility
34.4    NP-completeness proofs
34.5    NP-complete problems
Page number: 11
35    Appr oximation Algorithms
35.1    The vertex-cover problem
35.2    The traveling-salesperson problem
35.3    The set-covering problem
35.4    Randomization and linear programming
35.5    The subset-sum problem
VIII  Appendix: Mathematical Background
Intr oduction
A      Summations
A.1     Summation formulas and properties
A.2 Bounding summations
B     Sets, Etc.
B.1     Sets
B.2     Relations
B.3     Functions
B.4     Graphs
B.5     T rees
C     Counting and Pr obability
C.1     Counting
C.2     Probability
C.3     Discrete random variables
C.4     The geometric and binomial distributions
★      C.5      The tails of the binomial distribution
D     Matrices
D.1     Matrices and matrix operations
D.2     Basic matrix properties
Bibliography
Index
Page number: 12
Preface
Not so long ago, anyone who had heard the word “algorithm” was almost
certainly a computer scientist or mathematician. W ith computers having
become prevalent in our modern lives, however , the term is no longer
esoteric. If you look around your home, you’ll find algorithms running in
the most mundane places: your microwave oven, your washing machine,
and, of course, your computer . Y ou ask algorithms to make
recommendations to you: what music you might like or what route to take
when driving. Our society , for better or for worse, asks algorithms to
suggest sentences for convicted criminals. Y ou even rely on algorithms to
keep you alive, or at least not to kill you: the control systems in your car or
in medical equipment.1 The word “algorithm” appears somewhere in the
news seemingly every day .
Therefore, it behooves you to understand algorithms not just as a student
or practitioner of computer science, but as a citizen of the world. Once you
understand algorithms, you can educate others about what algorithms are,
how they operate, and what their limitations are.
This book provides a comprehensive introduction to the modern study of
computer algorithms. It presents many algorithms and covers them in
considerable depth, yet makes their design accessible to all levels of
readers. All the analyses are laid out, some simple, some more involved. W e
have tried to keep explanations clear without sacrificing depth of coverage
or mathematical rigor .
Each chapter presents an algorithm, a design technique, an application
area, or a related topic. Algorithms are described in English and in a
pseudocode designed to be readable by anyone who has done a little
programming. The book contains 231 figures—many with multiple parts—
illustrating how the algorithms work. Since we emphasize efficiency  as a
Page number: 13
design criterion, we include careful analyses of the running times of the
algorithms.
The text is intended primarily for use in under graduate or graduate
courses in algorithms or data structures. Because it discusses engineering
issues in algorithm design, as well as mathematical aspects, it is equally
well suited for self-study by technical professionals.
In this, the fourth edition, we have once again updated the entire book.
The changes cover a broad spectrum, including new chapters and sections,
color illustrations, and what we hope you’ll find to be a more engaging
writing style.
T o the teacher
W e have designed this book to be both versatile and complete. Y ou should
find it useful for a variety of courses, from an under graduate course in data
structures up through a graduate course in algorithms. Because we have
provided considerably more material than can fit in a typical one-term
course, you can select the material that best supports the course you wish to
teach.
Y ou should find it easy to or ganize your course around just the chapters
you need. W e have made chapters relatively self-contained, so that you
need not worry about an unexpected and unnecessary dependence of one
chapter on another . Whereas in an under graduate course, you might use
only some sections from a chapter , in a graduate course, you might cover
the entire chapter .
W e have included 931 exercises and 162 problems. Each section ends
with exercises, and each chapter ends with problems. The exercises are
generally short questions that test basic mastery of the material. Some are
simple self-check thought exercises, but many are substantial and suitable
as assigned homework. The problems include more elaborate case studies
which often introduce new material. They often consist of several parts that
lead the student through the steps required to arrive at a solution.
As with the third edition of this book, we have made publicly available
solutions to some, but by no means all, of the problems and exercises. Y ou
can find these solutions on our website, http://mitpress.mit.edu/algorithms/ .
Y ou will want to check this site to see whether it contains the solution to an
exercise or problem that you plan to assign. Since the set of solutions that
Page number: 14
we post might grow over time, we recommend that you check the site each
time you teach the course.
W e have starred ( ★ ) the sections and exercises that are more suitable for
graduate students than for under graduates. A starred section is not
necessarily more dif ficult than an unstarred one, but it may require an
understanding of more advanced mathematics. Likewise, starred exercises
may require an advanced background or more than average creativity .
T o the student
W e hope that this textbook provides you with an enjoyable introduction to
the field of algorithms. W e have attempted to make every algorithm
accessible and interesting. T o help you when you encounter unfamiliar or
dif ficult algorithms, we describe each one in a step-by-step manner . W e also
provide careful explanations of the mathematics needed to understand the
analysis of the algorithms and supporting figures to help you visualize what
is going on.
Since this book is lar ge, your class will probably cover only a portion of
its material. Although we hope that you will find this book helpful to you as
a course textbook now , we have also tried to make it comprehensive enough
to warrant space on your future professional bookshelf.
What are the prerequisites for reading this book?
Y ou need some programming experience. In particular , you should
understand recursive procedures and simple data structures, such as
arrays and linked lists (although Section 10.2  covers linked lists and a
variant that you may find new).
Y ou should have some facility with mathematical proofs, and
especially proofs by mathematical induction. A few portions of the
book rely on some knowledge of elementary calculus. Although this
book uses mathematics throughout, Part I  and Appendices A – D  teach
you all the mathematical techniques you will need.
Our website, http://mitpress.mit.edu/algorithms/ , links to solutions for
some of the problems and exercises. Feel free to check your solutions
against ours. W e ask, however , that you not send your solutions to us.
T o the pr ofessional
Page number: 15
The wide range of topics in this book makes it an excellent handbook on
algorithms. Because each chapter is relatively self-contained, you can focus
on the topics most relevant to you.
Since most of the algorithms we discuss have great practical utility , we
address implementation concerns and other engineering issues. W e often
provide practical alternatives to the few algorithms that are primarily of
theoretical interest.
If you wish to implement any of the algorithms, you should find the
translation of our pseudocode into your favorite programming language to
be a fairly straightforward task. W e have designed the pseudocode to
present each algorithm clearly and succinctly . Consequently , we do not
address error handling and other software-engineering issues that require
specific assumptions about your programming environment. W e attempt to
present each algorithm simply and directly without allowing the
idiosyncrasies of a particular programming language to obscure its essence.
If you are used to 0-origin arrays, you might find our frequent practice of
indexing arrays from 1 a minor stumbling block. Y ou can always either
subtract 1 from our indices or just overallocate the array and leave position
0 unused.
W e understand that if you are using this book outside of a course, then
you might be unable to check your solutions to problems and exercises
against solutions provided by an instructor . Our website,
http://mitpress.mit.edu/algorithms/ , links to solutions for some of the
problems and exercises so that you can check your work. Please do not send
your solutions to us.
T o our colleagues
W e have supplied an extensive bibliography and pointers to the current
literature. Each chapter ends with a set of chapter notes that give historical
details and references. The chapter notes do not provide a complete
reference to the whole field of algorithms, however . Though it may be hard
to believe for a book of this size, space constraints prevented us from
including many interesting algorithms.
Despite myriad requests from students for solutions to problems and
exercises, we have adopted the policy of not citing references for them,
removing the temptation for students to look up a solution rather than to
discover it themselves.
Page number: 16
Changes for the fourth edition
As we said about the changes for the second and third editions, depending
on how you look at it, the book changed either not much or quite a bit. A
quick look at the table of contents shows that most of the third-edition
chapters and sections appear in the fourth edition. W e removed three
chapters and several sections, but we have added three new chapters and
several new sections apart from these new chapters.
W e kept the hybrid or ganization from the first three editions. Rather than
or ganizing chapters only by problem domains or only according to
techniques, this book incorporates elements of both. It contains technique-
based chapters on divide-and-conquer , dynamic programming, greedy
algorithms, amortized analysis, augmenting data structures, NP-
completeness, and approximation algorithms. But it also has entire parts on
sorting, on data structures for dynamic sets, and on algorithms for graph
problems. W e find that although you need to know how to apply techniques
for designing and analyzing algorithms, problems seldom announce to you
which techniques are most amenable to solving them.
Some of the changes in the fourth edition apply generally across the
book, and some are specific to particular chapters or sections. Here is a
summary of the most significant general changes:
W e added 140 new exercises and 22 new problems. W e also
improved many of the old exercises and problems, often as the result
of reader feedback. (Thanks to all readers who made suggestions.)
W e have color! W ith designers from the MIT Press, we selected a
limited palette, devised to convey information and to be pleasing to
the eye. (W e are delighted to display red-black trees in—get this—red
and black!) T o enhance readability , defined terms, pseudocode
comments, and page numbers in the index are in color .
Pseudocode procedures appear on a tan background to make them
easier to spot, and they do not necessarily appear on the page of their
first reference. When they don’ t, the text directs you to the relevant
page. In the same vein, nonlocal references to numbered equations,
theorems, lemmas, and corollaries include the page number .
W e removed topics that were rarely taught. W e dropped in their
entirety the chapters on Fibonacci heaps, van Emde Boas trees, and
Page number: 17
computational geometry . In addition, the following material was
excised: the maximum-subarray problem, implementing pointers and
objects, perfect hashing, randomly built binary search trees, matroids,
push-relabel algorithms for maximum flow , the iterative fast Fourier
transform method, the details of the simplex algorithm for linear
programming, and integer factorization. Y ou can find all the removed
material on our website, http://mitpress.mit.edu/algorithms/ .
W e reviewed the entire book and rewrote sentences, paragraphs, and
sections to make the writing clearer , more personal, and gender
neutral. For example, the “traveling-salesman problem” in the
previous editions is now called the “traveling-salesperson problem.”
W e believe that it is critically important for engineering and science,
including our own field of computer science, to be welcoming to
everyone. (The one place that stumped us is in Chapter 13 , which
requires a term for a parent’ s sibling. Because the English language
has no such gender -neutral term, we regretfully stuck with “uncle.”)
The chapter notes, bibliography , and index were updated, reflecting
the dramatic growth of the field of algorithms since the third edition.
W e corrected errors, posting most corrections on our website of third-
edition errata. Those that were reported while we were in full swing
preparing this edition were not posted, but were corrected in this
edition. (Thanks again to all readers who helped us identify issues.)
The specific changes for the fourth edition include the following:
W e renamed Chapter 3  and added a section giving an overview of
asymptotic notation before delving into the formal definitions.
Chapter 4  underwent substantial changes to improve its mathematical
foundation and make it more robust and intuitive. The notion of an
algorithmic recurrence was introduced, and the topic of ignoring
floors and ceilings in recurrences was addressed more rigorously . The
second case of the master theorem incorporates polylogarithmic
factors, and a rigorous proof of a “continuous” version of the master
theorem is now provided. W e also present the powerful and general
Akra-Bazzi method (without proof).
Page number: 18
The deterministic order -statistic algorithm in Chapter 9  is slightly
dif ferent, and the analyses of both the randomized and deterministic
order -statistic algorithms have been revamped.
In addition to stacks and queues, Section 10.1  discusses ways to store
arrays and matrices.
Chapter 1 1  on hash tables includes a modern treatment of hash
functions. It also emphasizes linear probing as an ef ficient method for
resolving collisions when the underlying hardware implements
caching to favor local searches.
T o replace the sections on matroids in Chapter 15 , we converted a
problem in the third edition about of fline caching into a full section.
Section 16.4  now contains a more intuitive explanation of the
potential functions to analyze table doubling and halving.
Chapter 17  on augmenting data structures was relocated from Part III
to Part V , reflecting our view that this technique goes beyond basic
material.
Chapter 25  is a new chapter about matchings in bipartite graphs. It
presents algorithms to find a matching of maximum cardinality , to
solve the stable-marriage problem, and to find a maximum-weight
matching (known as the “assignment problem”).
Chapter 26 , on task-parallel computing, has been updated with
modern terminology , including the name of the chapter .
Chapter 27 , which covers online algorithms, is another new chapter .
In an online algorithm, the input arrives over time, rather than being
available in its entirety at the start of the algorithm. The chapter
describes several examples of online algorithms, including
determining how long to wait for an elevator before taking the stairs,
maintaining a linked list via the move-to-front heuristic, and
evaluating replacement policies for caches.
In Chapter 29 , we removed the detailed presentation of the simplex
algorithm, as it was math heavy without really conveying many
algorithmic ideas. The chapter now focuses on the key aspect of how
to model problems as linear programs, along with the essential
duality property of linear programming.
Page number: 19
Section 32.5  adds to the chapter on string matching the simple, yet
powerful, structure of suf fix arrays.
Chapter 33 , on machine learning, is the third new chapter . It
introduces several basic methods used in machine learning: clustering
to group similar items together , weighted-majority algorithms, and
gradient descent to find the minimizer of a function.
Section 34.5.6  summarizes strategies for polynomial-time reductions
to show that problems are NP-hard.
The proof of the approximation algorithm for the set-covering
problem in Section 35.3  has been revised.
W ebsite
Y ou can use our website, http://mitpress.mit.edu/algorithms/ , to obtain
supplementary information and to communicate with us. The website links
to a list of known errors, material from the third edition that is not included
in the fourth edition, solutions to selected exercises and problems, Python
implementations of many of the algorithms in this book, a list explaining
the corny professor jokes (of course), as well as other content, which we
may add to. The website also tells you how to report errors or make
suggestions.
How we pr oduced this book
Like the previous three editions, the fourth edition was produced in LATE X
2ε . W e used the T imes font with mathematics typeset using the MathT ime
Professional II fonts. As in all previous editions, we compiled the index
using W index, a C program that we wrote, and produced the bibliography
using BIBTE X. The PDF files for this book were created on a MacBook Pro
running macOS 10.14.
Our plea to Apple in the preface of the third edition to update MacDraw
Pro for macOS 10 went for naught, and so we continued to draw
illustrations on pre-Intel Macs running MacDraw Pro under the Classic
environment of older versions of macOS 10. Many of the mathematical
expressions appearing in illustrations were laid in with the psfrag package
for LATE X 2ε .
Page number: 20
Acknowledgments for the fourth edition
W e have been working with the MIT Press since we started writing the first
edition in 1987, collaborating with several directors, editors, and production
staf f. Throughout our association with the MIT Press, their support has
always been outstanding. Special thanks to our editors Marie Lee, who put
up with us for far too long, and Elizabeth Swayze, who pushed us over the
finish line. Thanks also to Director Amy Brand and to Alex Hoopes.
As in the third edition, we were geographically distributed while
producing the fourth edition, working in the Dartmouth College Department
of Computer Science; the MIT Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence
Laboratory and the MIT Department of Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science; and the Columbia University Department of Industrial
Engineering and Operations Research, Department of Computer Science,
and Data Science Institute. During the COVID-19 pandemic, we worked
lar gely from home. W e thank our respective universities and colleagues for
providing such supportive and stimulating environments. As we complete
this book, those of us who are not retired are eager to return to our
respective universities now that the pandemic seems to be abating.
Julie Sussman, P .P .A., came to our rescue once again with her technical
copy-editing under tremendous time pressure. If not for Julie, this book
would be riddled with errors (or , let’ s say , many more errors than it has) and
would be far less readable. Julie, we will be forever indebted to you. Errors
that remain are the responsibility of the authors (and probably were inserted
after Julie read the material).
Dozens of errors in previous editions were corrected in the process of
creating this edition. W e thank our readers—too many to list them all—who
have reported errors and suggested improvements over the years.
W e received considerable help in preparing some of the new material in
this edition. Neville Campbell (unaf filiated), Bill Kuszmaul of MIT , and
Chee Y ap of NYU provided valuable advice regarding the treatment of
recurrences in Chapter 4 . Y an Gu of the University of California, Riverside,
provided feedback on parallel algorithms in Chapter 26 . Rob Shapire of
Microsoft Research altered our approach to the material on machine
learning with his detailed comments on Chapter 33 . Qi Qi of MIT helped
with the analysis of the Monty Hall problem (Problem C-1).
Molly Seaman and Mary Reilly of the MIT Press helped us select the
color palette in the illustrations, and W ojciech Jarosz of Dartmouth College
Page number: 21
suggested design improvements to our newly colored figures. Y ichen
(Annie) Ke and Linda Xiao, who have since graduated from Dartmouth,
aided in colorizing the illustrations, and Linda also produced many of the
Python implementations that are available on the book’ s website.
Finally , we thank our wives—W endy Leiserson, Gail Rivest, Rebecca
Ivry , and the late Nicole Cormen—and our families. The patience and
encouragement of those who love us made this project possible. W e
af fectionately dedicate this book to them.
 
T HOMAS  H. C ORMEN Lebanon, New Hampshir e
C HARLES  E. L EISERSON Cambridge, Massachusetts
R ONALD  L. R IVEST Cambridge, Massachusetts
C LIFFORD  S TEIN New Y ork, New Y ork
June,  2021
1 T o understand many of the ways in which algorithms influence our daily lives, see the book by Fry
[ 162 ].
Page number: 22
Part I    Foundations
Page number: 23
 
 
Intr oduction
When you design and analyze algorithms, you need to be able to describe
how they operate and how to design them. Y ou also need some
mathematical tools to show that your algorithms do the right thing and do it
ef ficiently . This part will get you started. Later parts of this book will build
upon this base.
Chapter 1  provides an overview of algorithms and their place in modern
computing systems. This chapter defines what an algorithm is and lists
some examples. It also makes a case for considering algorithms as a
technology , alongside technologies such as fast hardware, graphical user
interfaces, object-oriented systems, and networks.
In Chapter 2 , we see our first algorithms, which solve the problem of
sorting a sequence of n  numbers. They are written in a pseudocode which,
although not directly translatable to any conventional programming
language, conveys the structure of the algorithm clearly enough that you
should be able to implement it in the language of your choice. The sorting
algorithms we examine are insertion sort, which uses an incremental
approach, and mer ge sort, which uses a recursive technique known as
“divide-and-conquer .” Although the time each requires increases with the
value of n , the rate of increase dif fers between the two algorithms. W e
determine these running times in Chapter 2 , and we develop a useful
“asymptotic” notation to express them.
Chapter 3  precisely defines asymptotic notation. W e’ll use asymptotic
notation to bound the growth of functions—most often, functions that
describe the running time of algorithms—from above and below . The
chapter starts by informally defining the most commonly used asymptotic
Page number: 24
notations and giving an example of how to apply them. It then formally
defines five asymptotic notations and presents conventions for how to put
them together . The rest of Chapter 3  is primarily a presentation of
mathematical notation, more to ensure that your use of notation matches
that in this book than to teach you new mathematical concepts.
Chapter 4  delves further into the divide-and-conquer method introduced
in Chapter 2 . It provides two additional examples of divide-and-conquer
algorithms for multiplying square matrices, including Strassen’ s surprising
method. Chapter 4  contains methods for solving recurrences, which are
useful for describing the running times of recursive algorithms. In the
substitution method, you guess an answer and prove it correct. Recursion
trees provide one way to generate a guess. Chapter 4  also presents the
powerful technique of the “master method,” which you can often use to
solve recurrences that arise from divide-and-conquer algorithms. Although
the chapter provides a proof of a foundational theorem on which the master
theorem depends, you should feel free to employ the master method without
delving into the proof. Chapter 4  concludes with some advanced topics.
Chapter 5  introduces probabilistic analysis and randomized algorithms.
Y ou typically use probabilistic analysis to determine the running time of an
algorithm in cases in which, due to the presence of an inherent probability
distribution, the running time may dif fer on dif ferent inputs of the same
size. In some cases, you might assume that the inputs conform to a known
probability distribution, so that you are averaging the running time over all
possible inputs. In other cases, the probability distribution comes not from
the inputs but from random choices made during the course of the
algorithm. An algorithm whose behavior is determined not only by its input
but by the values produced by a random-number generator is a randomized
algorithm. Y ou can use randomized algorithms to enforce a probability
distribution on the inputs—thereby ensuring that no particular input always
causes poor performance—or even to bound the error rate of algorithms that
are allowed to produce incorrect results on a limited basis.
Appendices A – D  contain other mathematical material that you will find
helpful as you read this book. Y ou might have seen much of the material in
the appendix chapters before having read this book (although the specific
definitions and notational conventions we use may dif fer in some cases
from what you have seen in the past), and so you should think of the
appendices as reference material. On the other hand, you probably have not
Page number: 25
already seen most of the material in Part I. All the chapters in Part I and the
appendices are written with a tutorial flavor .
Page number: 26
1          The Role of Algorithms in Computing
What are algorithms? Why is the study of algorithms worthwhile? What is
the role of algorithms relative to other technologies used in computers? This
chapter will answer these questions.
1.1      Algorithms
Informally , an algorithm  is any well-defined computational procedure that
takes some value, or set of values, as input  and produces some value, or set
of values, as output  in a finite amount of time. An algorithm is thus a
sequence of computational steps that transform the input into the output.
Y ou can also view an algorithm as a tool for solving a well-specified
computational problem . The statement of the problem specifies in general
terms the desired input/output relationship for problem instances, typically
of arbitrarily lar ge size. The algorithm describes a specific computational
procedure for achieving that input/output relationship for all problem
instances.
As an example, suppose that you need to sort a sequence of numbers
into monotonically increasing order . This problem arises frequently in
practice and provides fertile ground for introducing many standard design
techniques and analysis tools. Here is how we formally define the sorting
problem :
Input:  A sequence of n  numbers 〈 a1 , a2 , … , an〉 .
Output:  A permutation (reordering) 
  of the input sequence
such that 
 .
Page number: 27
Thus, given the input sequence 〈 31, 41, 59, 26, 41, 58 〉 , a correct sorting
algorithm returns as output the sequence 〈 26, 31, 41, 41, 58, 59 〉 . Such an
input sequence is called an instance  of the sorting problem. In general, an
instance of a problem1 consists of the input (satisfying whatever
constraints are imposed in the problem statement) needed to compute a
solution to the problem.
Because many programs use it as an intermediate step, sorting is a
fundamental operation in computer science. As a result, you have a lar ge
number of good sorting algorithms at your disposal. Which algorithm is
best for a given application depends on—among other factors—the number
of items to be sorted, the extent to which the items are already somewhat
sorted, possible restrictions on the item values, the architecture of the
computer , and the kind of storage devices to be used: main memory , disks,
or even—archaically—tapes.
An algorithm for a computational problem is correct  if, for every
problem instance provided as input, it halts —finishes its computing in
finite time—and outputs the correct solution to the problem instance. A
correct algorithm solves  the given computational problem. An incorrect
algorithm might not halt at all on some input instances, or it might halt with
an incorrect answer . Contrary to what you might expect, incorrect
algorithms can sometimes be useful, if you can control their error rate.
W e’ll see an example of an algorithm with a controllable error rate in
Chapter 31  when we study algorithms for finding lar ge prime numbers.
Ordinarily , however , we’ll concern ourselves only with correct algorithms.
An algorithm can be specified in English, as a computer program, or
even as a hardware design. The only requirement is that the specification
must provide a precise description of the computational procedure to be
followed.
What kinds of pr oblems ar e solved by algorithms?
Sorting is by no means the only computational problem for which
algorithms have been developed. (Y ou probably suspected as much when
you saw the size of this book.) Practical applications of algorithms are
ubiquitous and include the following examples:
The Human Genome Project has made great progress toward the
goals of identifying all the roughly 30,000 genes in human DNA,
Page number: 28
determining the sequences of the roughly 3 billion chemical base
pairs that make up human DNA, storing this information in
databases, and developing tools for data analysis. Each of these steps
requires sophisticated algorithms. Although the solutions to the
various problems involved are beyond the scope of this book, many
methods to solve these biological problems use ideas presented here,
enabling scientists to accomplish tasks while using resources
ef ficiently . Dynamic programming, as in Chapter 14 , is an important
technique for solving several of these biological problems,
particularly ones that involve determining similarity between DNA
sequences. The savings realized are in time, both human and
machine, and in money , as more information can be extracted by
laboratory techniques.
The internet enables people all around the world to quickly access
and retrieve lar ge amounts of information. W ith the aid of clever
algorithms, sites on the internet are able to manage and manipulate
this lar ge volume of data. Examples of problems that make essential
use of algorithms include finding good routes on which the data
travels (techniques for solving such problems appear in Chapter 22 ),
and using a search engine to quickly find pages on which particular
information resides (related techniques are in Chapters 1 1  and 32 ).
Electronic commerce enables goods and services to be negotiated and
exchanged electronically , and it depends on the privacy of personal
information such as credit card numbers, passwords, and bank
statements. The core technologies used in electronic commerce
include public-key cryptography and digital signatures (covered in
Chapter 31 ), which are based on numerical algorithms and number
theory .
Manufacturing and other commercial enterprises often need to
allocate scarce resources in the most beneficial way . An oil company
might wish to know where to place its wells in order to maximize its
expected profit. A political candidate might want to determine where
to spend money buying campaign advertising in order to maximize
the chances of winning an election. An airline might wish to assign
crews to flights in the least expensive way possible, making sure that
each flight is covered and that government regulations regarding
Page number: 29
crew scheduling are met. An internet service provider might wish to
determine where to place additional resources in order to serve its
customers more ef fectively . All of these are examples of problems
that can be solved by modeling them as linear programs, which
Chapter 29  explores.
Although some of the details of these examples are beyond the scope of
this book, we do give underlying techniques that apply to these problems
and problem areas. W e also show how to solve many specific problems,
including the following:
Y ou have a road map on which the distance between each pair of
adjacent intersections is marked, and you wish to determine the
shortest route from one intersection to another . The number of
possible routes can be huge, even if you disallow routes that cross
over themselves. How can you choose which of all possible routes is
the shortest? Y ou can start by modeling the road map (which is itself
a model of the actual roads) as a graph (which we will meet in Part
VI  and Appendix B ). In this graph, you wish to find the shortest path
from one vertex to another . Chapter 22  shows how to solve this
problem ef ficiently .
Given a mechanical design in terms of a library of parts, where each
part may include instances of other parts, list the parts in order so that
each part appears before any part that uses it. If the design comprises
n  parts, then there are n ! possible orders, where n ! denotes the
factorial function. Because the factorial function grows faster than
even an exponential function, you cannot feasibly generate each
possible order and then verify that, within that order , each part
appears before the parts using it (unless you have only a few parts).
This problem is an instance of topological sorting, and Chapter 20
shows how to solve this problem ef ficiently .
A doctor needs to determine whether an image represents a cancerous
tumor or a benign one. The doctor has available images of many
other tumors, some of which are known to be cancerous and some of
which are known to be benign. A cancerous tumor is likely to be
more similar to other cancerous tumors than to benign tumors, and a
benign tumor is more likely to be similar to other benign tumors. By
Page number: 30
using a clustering algorithm, as in Chapter 33 , the doctor can identify
which outcome is more likely .
Y ou need to compress a lar ge file containing text so that it occupies
less space. Many ways to do so are known, including “LZW
compression,” which looks for repeating character sequences.
Chapter 15  studies a dif ferent approach, “Huf fman coding,” which
encodes characters by bit sequences of various lengths, with
characters occurring more frequently encoded by shorter bit
sequences.
These lists are far from exhaustive (as you again have probably surmised
from this book’ s heft), but they exhibit two characteristics common to many
interesting algorithmic problems:
1 . They have many candidate solutions, the overwhelming majority of
which do not solve the problem at hand. Finding one that does, or
one that is “best,” without explicitly examining each possible
solution, can present quite a challenge.
2 . They have practical applications. Of the problems in the above list,
finding the shortest path provides the easiest examples. A
transportation firm, such as a trucking or railroad company , has a
financial interest in finding shortest paths through a road or rail
network because taking shorter paths results in lower labor and fuel
costs. Or a routing node on the internet might need to find the
shortest path through the network in order to route a message
quickly . Or a person wishing to drive from New Y ork to Boston
might want to find driving directions using a navigation app.
Not every problem solved by algorithms has an easily identified set of
candidate solutions. For example, given a set of numerical values
representing samples of a signal taken at regular time intervals, the discrete
Fourier transform converts the time domain to the frequency domain. That
is, it approximates the signal as a weighted sum of sinusoids, producing the
strength of various frequencies which, when summed, approximate the
sampled signal. In addition to lying at the heart of signal processing,
discrete Fourier transforms have applications in data compression and
multiplying lar ge polynomials and integers. Chapter 30  gives an ef ficient
algorithm, the fast Fourier transform (commonly called the FFT), for this
Page number: 31
problem. The chapter also sketches out the design of a hardware FFT
circuit.
Data structur es
This book also presents several data structures. A data structure  is a way to
store and or ganize data in order to facilitate access and modifications. Using
the appropriate data structure or structures is an important part of algorithm
design. No single data structure works well for all purposes, and so you
should know the strengths and limitations of several of them.
T echnique
Although you can use this book as a “cookbook” for algorithms, you might
someday encounter a problem for which you cannot readily find a published
algorithm (many of the exercises and problems in this book, for example).
This book will teach you techniques of algorithm design and analysis so
that you can develop algorithms on your own, show that they give the
correct answer , and analyze their ef ficiency . Dif ferent chapters address
dif ferent aspects of algorithmic problem solving. Some chapters address
specific problems, such as finding medians and order statistics in Chapter 9 ,
computing minimum spanning trees in Chapter 21 , and determining a
maximum flow in a network in Chapter 24 . Other chapters introduce
techniques, such as divide-and-conquer in Chapters 2  and 4 , dynamic
programming in Chapter 14 , and amortized analysis in Chapter 16 .
Hard pr oblems
Most of this book is about ef ficient algorithms. Our usual measure of
ef ficiency is speed: how long does an algorithm take to produce its result?
There are some problems, however , for which we know of no algorithm that
runs in a reasonable amount of time. Chapter 34  studies an interesting
subset of these problems, which are known as NP-complete.
Why are NP-complete problems interesting? First, although no ef ficient
algorithm for an NP-complete problem has ever been found, nobody has
ever proven that an ef ficient algorithm for one cannot exist. In other words,
no one knows whether ef ficient algorithms exist for NP-complete problems.
Second, the set of NP-complete problems has the remarkable property that
if an ef ficient algorithm exists for any one of them, then ef ficient algorithms
Page number: 32
exist for all of them. This relationship among the NP-complete problems
makes the lack of ef ficient solutions all the more tantalizing. Third, several
NP-complete problems are similar , but not identical, to problems for which
we do know of ef ficient algorithms. Computer scientists are intrigued by
how a small change to the problem statement can cause a big change to the
ef ficiency of the best known algorithm.
Y ou should know about NP-complete problems because some of them
arise surprisingly often in real applications. If you are called upon to
produce an ef ficient algorithm for an NP-complete problem, you are likely
to spend a lot of time in a fruitless search. If, instead, you can show that the
problem is NP-complete, you can spend your time developing an ef ficient
approximation algorithm, that is, an algorithm that gives a good, but not
necessarily the best possible, solution.
As a concrete example, consider a delivery company with a central
depot. Each day , it loads up delivery trucks at the depot and sends them
around to deliver goods to several addresses. At the end of the day , each
truck must end up back at the depot so that it is ready to be loaded for the
next day . T o reduce costs, the company wants to select an order of delivery
stops that yields the lowest overall distance traveled by each truck. This
problem is the well-known “traveling-salesperson problem,” and it is NP-
complete.2 It has no known ef ficient algorithm. Under certain assumptions,
however , we know of ef ficient algorithms that compute overall distances
close to the smallest possible. Chapter 35  discusses such “approximation
algorithms.”
Alternative computing models
For many years, we could count on processor clock speeds increasing at a
steady rate. Physical limitations present a fundamental roadblock to ever -
increasing clock speeds, however: because power density increases
superlinearly with clock speed, chips run the risk of melting once their
clock speeds become high enough. In order to perform more computations
per second, therefore, chips are being designed to contain not just one but
several processing “cores.” W e can liken these multicore computers to
several sequential computers on a single chip. In other words, they are a
type of “parallel computer .” In order to elicit the best performance from
multicore computers, we need to design algorithms with parallelism in
mind. Chapter 26  presents a model for “task-parallel” algorithms, which
Page number: 33
take advantage of multiple processing cores. This model has advantages
from both theoretical and practical standpoints, and many modern parallel-
programming platforms embrace something similar to this model of
parallelism.
Most of the examples in this book assume that all of the input data are
available when an algorithm begins running. Much of the work in algorithm
design makes the same assumption. For many important real-world
examples, however , the input actually arrives over time, and the algorithm
must decide how to proceed without knowing what data will arrive in the
future. In a data center , jobs are constantly arriving and departing, and a
scheduling algorithm must decide when and where to run a job, without
knowing what jobs will be arriving in the future. T raf fic must be routed in
the internet based on the current state, without knowing about where traf fic
will arrive in the future. Hospital emer gency rooms make triage decisions
about which patients to treat first without knowing when other patients will
be arriving in the future and what treatments they will need. Algorithms that
receive their input over time, rather than having all the input present at the
start, are online algorithms , which Chapter 27  examines.
Exer cises
1.1-1
Describe your own real-world example that requires sorting. Describe one
that requires finding the shortest distance between two points.
1.1-2
Other than speed, what other measures of ef ficiency might you need to
consider in a real-world setting?
1.1-3
Select a data structure that you have seen, and discuss its strengths and
limitations.
1.1-4
How are the shortest-path and traveling-salesperson problems given above
similar? How are they dif ferent?
1.1-5
Page number: 34
Suggest a real-world problem in which only the best solution will do. Then
come up with one in which “approximately” the best solution is good
enough.
1.1-6
Describe a real-world problem in which sometimes the entire input is
available before you need to solve the problem, but other times the input is
not entirely available in advance and arrives over time.
1.2      Algorithms as a technology
If computers were infinitely fast and computer memory were free, would
you have any reason to study algorithms? The answer is yes, if for no other
reason than that you would still like to be certain that your solution method
terminates and does so with the correct answer .
If computers were infinitely fast, any correct method for solving a
problem would do. Y ou would probably want your implementation to be
within the bounds of good software engineering practice (for example, your
implementation should be well designed and documented), but you would
most often use whichever method was the easiest to implement.
Of course, computers may be fast, but they are not infinitely fast.
Computing time is therefore a bounded resource, which makes it precious.
Although the saying goes, “T ime is money ,” time is even more valuable
than money: you can get back money after you spend it, but once time is
spent, you can never get it back. Memory may be inexpensive, but it is
neither infinite nor free. Y ou should choose algorithms that use the
resources of time and space ef ficiently .
Efficiency
Dif ferent algorithms devised to solve the same problem often dif fer
dramatically in their ef ficiency . These dif ferences can be much more
significant than dif ferences due to hardware and software.
As an example, Chapter 2  introduces two algorithms for sorting. The
first, known as insertion sort , takes time roughly equal to c1 n2 to sort n
items, where c1  is a constant that does not depend on n . That is, it takes time
roughly proportional to n2. The second, merge sort , takes time roughly
Page number: 35
equal to c2 n  lg n , where lg n  stands for log2  n  and c2  is another constant that
also does not depend on n . Insertion sort typically has a smaller constant
factor than mer ge sort, so that c1  < c2 . W e’ll see that the constant factors can
have far less of an impact on the running time than the dependence on the
input size n . Let’ s write insertion sort’ s running time as c1 n  · n  and mer ge
sort’ s running time as c2 n  · lg n . Then we see that where insertion sort has a
factor of n  in its running time, mer ge sort has a factor of lg n , which is
much smaller . For example, when n  is 1000, lg n  is approximately 10, and
when n  is 1,000,000, lg n  is approximately only 20. Although insertion sort
usually runs faster than mer ge sort for small input sizes, once the input size
n  becomes lar ge enough, mer ge sort’ s advantage of lg n  versus n  more than
compensates for the dif ference in constant factors. No matter how much
smaller c1  is than c2 , there is always a crossover point beyond which mer ge
sort is faster .
For a concrete example, let us pit a faster computer (computer A)
running insertion sort against a slower computer (computer B) running
mer ge sort. They each must sort an array of 10 million numbers. (Although
10 million numbers might seem like a lot, if the numbers are eight-byte
integers, then the input occupies about 80 megabytes, which fits in the
memory of even an inexpensive laptop computer many times over .)
Suppose that computer A executes 10 billion instructions per second (faster
than any single sequential computer at the time of this writing) and
computer B executes only 10 million instructions per second (much slower
than most contemporary computers), so that computer A is 1000 times
faster than computer B in raw computing power . T o make the dif ference
even more dramatic, suppose that the world’ s craftiest programmer codes
insertion sort in machine language for computer A, and the resulting code
requires 2 n2 instructions to sort n  numbers. Suppose further that just an
average programmer implements mer ge sort, using a high-level language
with an inef ficient compiler , with the resulting code taking 50 n  lg n
instructions. T o sort 10 million numbers, computer A takes
while computer B takes
Page number: 36
By using an algorithm whose running time grows more slowly , even with a
poor compiler , computer B runs more than 17 times faster than computer A!
The advantage of mer ge sort is even more pronounced when sorting 100
million numbers: where insertion sort takes more than 23 days, mer ge sort
takes under four hours. Although 100 million might seem like a lar ge
number , there are more than 100 million web searches every half hour ,
more than 100 million emails sent every minute, and some of the smallest
galaxies (known as ultra-compact dwarf galaxies) contain about 100 million
stars. In general, as the problem size increases, so does the relative
advantage of mer ge sort.
Algorithms and other technologies
The example above shows that you should consider algorithms, like
computer hardware, as a technology . T otal system performance depends on
choosing ef ficient algorithms as much as on choosing fast hardware. Just as
rapid advances are being made in other computer technologies, they are
being made in algorithms as well.
Y ou might wonder whether algorithms are truly that important on
contemporary computers in light of other advanced technologies, such as
advanced computer architectures and fabrication technologies,
easy-to-use, intuitive, graphical user interfaces (GUIs),
object-oriented systems,
integrated web technologies,
fast networking, both wired and wireless,
machine learning,
and mobile devices.
The answer is yes. Although some applications do not explicitly require
algorithmic content at the application level (such as some simple, web-
based applications), many do. For example, consider a web-based service
that determines how to travel from one location to another . Its
implementation would rely on fast hardware, a graphical user interface,
Page number: 37
wide-area networking, and also possibly on object orientation. It would also
require algorithms for operations such as finding routes (probably using a
shortest-path algorithm), rendering maps, and interpolating addresses.
Moreover , even an application that does not require algorithmic content
at the application level relies heavily upon algorithms. Does the application
rely on fast hardware? The hardware design used algorithms. Does the
application rely on graphical user interfaces? The design of any GUI relies
on algorithms. Does the application rely on networking? Routing in
networks relies heavily on algorithms. W as the application written in a
language other than machine code? Then it was processed by a compiler ,
interpreter , or assembler , all of which make extensive use of algorithms.
Algorithms are at the core of most technologies used in contemporary
computers.
Machine learning can be thought of as a method for performing
algorithmic tasks without explicitly designing an algorithm, but instead
inferring patterns from data and thereby automatically learning a solution.
At first glance, machine learning, which automates the process of
algorithmic design, may seem to make learning about algorithms obsolete.
The opposite is true, however . Machine learning is itself a collection of
algorithms, just under a dif ferent name. Furthermore, it currently seems that
the successes of machine learning are mainly for problems for which we, as
humans, do not really understand what the right algorithm is. Prominent
examples include computer vision and automatic language translation. For
algorithmic problems that humans understand well, such as most of the
problems in this book, ef ficient algorithms designed to solve a specific
problem are typically more successful than machine-learning approaches.
Data science is an interdisciplinary field with the goal of extracting
knowledge and insights from structured and unstructured data. Data science
uses methods from statistics, computer science, and optimization. The
design and analysis of algorithms is fundamental to the field. The core
techniques of data science, which overlap significantly with those in
machine learning, include many of the algorithms in this book.
Furthermore, with the ever -increasing capacities of computers, we use
them to solve lar ger problems than ever before. As we saw in the above
comparison between insertion sort and mer ge sort, it is at lar ger problem
sizes that the dif ferences in ef ficiency between algorithms become
particularly prominent.
Page number: 38
Having a solid base of algorithmic knowledge and technique is one
characteristic that defines the truly skilled programmer . W ith modern
computing technology , you can accomplish some tasks without knowing
much about algorithms, but with a good background in algorithms, you can
do much, much more.
Exer cises
1.2-1
Give an example of an application that requires algorithmic content at the
application level, and discuss the function of the algorithms involved.
1.2-2
Suppose that for inputs of size n  on a particular computer , insertion sort
runs in 8 n2 steps and mer ge sort runs in 64 n  lg n  steps. For which values of
n  does insertion sort beat mer ge sort?
1.2-3
What is the smallest value of n  such that an algorithm whose running time
is 100 n2 runs faster than an algorithm whose running time is 2n on the same
machine?
Pr oblems
1-1     Comparison of running times
For each function f  ( n ) and time t  in the following table, determine the
lar gest size n  of a problem that can be solved in time t , assuming that the
algorithm to solve the problem takes f  ( n ) microseconds.
Page number: 39
Chapter notes
There are many excellent texts on the general topic of algorithms, including
those by Aho, Hopcroft, and Ullman [ 5 , 6 ], Dasgupta, Papadimitriou, and
V azirani [ 107 ], Edmonds [ 133 ], Erickson [ 135 ], Goodrich and T amassia
[ 195 , 196 ], Kleinber g and T ardos [ 257 ], Knuth [ 259 , 260 , 261 , 262 , 263 ],
Levitin [ 298 ], Louridas [ 305 ], Mehlhorn and Sanders [ 325 ], Mitzenmacher
and Upfal [ 331 ], Neapolitan [ 342 ], Roughgarden [ 385 , 386 , 387 , 388 ],
Sanders, Mehlhorn, Dietzfelbinger , and Dementiev [ 393 ], Sedgewick and
W ayne [ 402 ], Skiena [ 414 ], Soltys-Kulinicz [ 419 ], W ilf [ 455 ], and
W illiamson and Shmoys [ 459 ]. Some of the more practical aspects of
algorithm design are discussed by Bentley [ 49 , 50 , 51 ], Bhar gava [ 54 ],
Kochenderfer and Wheeler [ 268 ], and McGeoch [ 321 ]. Surveys of the field
of algorithms can also be found in books by Atallah and Blanton [ 27 , 28 ]
and Mehta and Sahhi [ 326 ]. For less technical material, see the books by
Christian and Grif fiths [ 92 ], Cormen [ 104 ], Erwig [ 136 ], MacCormick
[ 307 ], and Vöcking et al. [ 448 ]. Overviews of the algorithms used in
computational biology can be found in books by Jones and Pevzner [ 240 ],
Elloumi and Zomaya [ 134 ], and Marchisio [ 315 ].
1 Sometimes, when the problem context is known, problem instances are themselves simply called
“problems.”
Page number: 40
2 T o be precise, only decision problems—those with a “yes/no” answer—can be NP-complete. The
decision version of the traveling salesperson problem asks whether there exists an order of stops
whose distance totals at most a given amount.
Page number: 41
2          Getting Started
This chapter will familiarize you with the framework we’ll use throughout
the book to think about the design and analysis of algorithms. It is self-
contained, but it does include several references to material that will be
introduced in Chapters 3  and 4 . (It also contains several summations, which
Appendix A  shows how to solve.)
W e’ll begin by examining the insertion sort algorithm to solve the
sorting problem introduced in Chapter 1 . W e’ll specify algorithms using a
pseudocode that should be understandable to you if you have done
computer programming. W e’ll see why insertion sort correctly sorts and
analyze its running time. The analysis introduces a notation that describes
how running time increases with the number of items to be sorted.
Following a discussion of insertion sort, we’ll use a method called divide-
and-conquer to develop a sorting algorithm called mer ge sort. W e’ll end
with an analysis of mer ge sort’ s running time.
2.1      Insertion sort
Our first algorithm, insertion sort, solves the sorting problem  introduced in
Chapter 1 :
Input:  A sequence of n  numbers 〈 a1 , a2 , … , an〉 .
Output:  A permutation (reordering) 
  of the input sequence
such that 
 .
The numbers to be sorted are also known as the keys . Although the problem
is conceptually about sorting a sequence, the input comes in the form of an
Page number: 42
array with n  elements. When we want to sort numbers, it’ s often because
they are the keys associated with other data, which we call satellite data .
T ogether , a key and satellite data form a record . For example, consider a
spreadsheet containing student records with many associated pieces of data
such as age, grade-point average, and number of courses taken. Any one of
these quantities could be a key , but when the spreadsheet sorts, it moves the
associated record (the satellite data) with the key . When describing a sorting
algorithm, we focus on the keys, but it is important to remember that there
usually is associated satellite data.
In this book, we’ll typically describe algorithms as procedures written in
a pseudocode  that is similar in many respects to C, C++, Java, Python,1 or
JavaScript. (Apologies if we’ve omitted your favorite programming
language. W e can’ t list them all.) If you have been introduced to any of
these languages, you should have little trouble understanding algorithms
“coded” in pseudocode. What separates pseudocode from real code is that
in pseudocode, we employ whatever expressive method is most clear and
concise to specify a given algorithm. Sometimes the clearest method is
English, so do not be surprised if you come across an English phrase or
sentence embedded within a section that looks more like real code. Another
dif ference between pseudocode and real code is that pseudocode often
ignores aspects of software engineering—such as data abstraction,
modularity , and error handling—in order to convey the essence of the
algorithm more concisely .
W e start with insertion sort , which is an ef ficient algorithm for sorting a
small number of elements. Insertion sort works the way you might sort a
hand of playing cards. Start with an empty left hand and the cards in a pile
on the table. Pick up the first card in the pile and hold it with your left hand.
Then, with your right hand, remove one card at a time from the pile, and
insert it into the correct position in your left hand. As Figure 2.1  illustrates,
you find the correct position for a card by comparing it with each of the
cards already in your left hand, starting at the right and moving left. As
soon as you see a card in your left hand whose value is less than or equal to
the card you’re holding in your right hand, insert the card that you’re
holding in your right hand just to the right of this card in your left hand. If
all the cards in your left hand have values greater than the card in your right
hand, then place this card as the leftmost card in your left hand. At all
Page number: 43
times, the cards held in your left hand are sorted, and these cards were
originally the top cards of the pile on the table.
The pseudocode for insertion sort is given as the procedure I NSER TION -
S OR T  on the facing page. It takes two parameters: an array A  containing the
values to be sorted and the number n  of values of sort. The values occupy
positions A [1] through A [ n ] of the array , which we denote by A [1 : n ].
When the I NSER TION -S OR T  procedure is finished, array A [1 : n ] contains the
original values, but in sorted order .
Figur e 2.1  Sorting a hand of cards using insertion sort.
I NSER TION -S OR T ( A, n )
1 for  i  = 2 to  n
2 key  = A [ i ]
3 //  Insert A [ i ] into the sorted subarray A [1 : i  – 1].
4 j  = i  – 1
5 while  j  > 0 and A [ j ] > key
6 A [ j  + 1] = A [ j ]
7 j  = j  – 1
8 A [ j  + 1] = key
Loop invariants and the corr ectness of insertion sort
Figure 2.2  shows how this algorithm works for an array A  that starts out
with the sequence 〈 5, 2, 4, 6, 1, 3 〉 . The index i  indicates the “current card”
being inserted into the hand. At the beginning of each iteration of the for
Page number: 44
loop, which is indexed by i , the subarray  (a contiguous portion of the array)
consisting of elements A [1 : i  – 1] (that is, A [1] through A [ i  – 1]) constitutes
the currently sorted hand, and the remaining subarray A [ i  + 1 : n ] (elements
A [ i  + 1] through A [ n ]) corresponds to the pile of cards still on the table. In
fact, elements A [1 : i  – 1] are the elements originally  in positions 1 through
i  – 1, but now in sorted order . W e state these properties of A [1 : i  – 1]
formally as a loop invariant :
Figur e 2.2  The operation of I NSER TION -S OR T ( A, n ), where A  initially contains the sequence 〈 5, 2,
4, 6, 1, 3 〉  and n  = 6. Array indices appear above the rectangles, and values stored in the array
positions appear within the rectangles. (a)–(e)  The iterations of the for  loop of lines 1–8. In each
iteration, the blue rectangle holds the key taken from A [ i ], which is compared with the values in tan
rectangles to its left in the test of line 5. Orange arrows show array values moved one position to the
right in line 6, and blue arrows indicate where the key moves to in line 8. (f)  The final sorted array .
At the start of each iteration of the for  loop of lines 1–8, the
subarray A [1 : i  – 1] consists of the elements originally in A [1 : i  –
1], but in sorted order .
Loop invariants help us understand why an algorithm is correct. When
you’re using a loop invariant, you need to show three things:
Initialization:  It is true prior to the first iteration of the loop.
Maintenance:  If it is true before an iteration of the loop, it remains true
before the next iteration.
T ermination:  The loop terminates, and when it terminates, the invariant—
usually along with the reason that the loop terminated—gives us a useful
property that helps show that the algorithm is correct.
When the first two properties hold, the loop invariant is true prior to every
iteration of the loop. (Of course, you are free to use established facts other
than the loop invariant itself to prove that the loop invariant remains true
Page number: 45
before each iteration.) A loop-invariant proof is a form of mathematical
induction, where to prove that a property holds, you prove a base case and
an inductive step. Here, showing that the invariant holds before the first
iteration corresponds to the base case, and showing that the invariant holds
from iteration to iteration corresponds to the inductive step.
The third property is perhaps the most important one, since you are
using the loop invariant to show correctness. T ypically , you use the loop
invariant along with the condition that caused the loop to terminate.
Mathematical induction typically applies the inductive step infinitely , but in
a loop invariant the “induction” stops when the loop terminates.
Let’ s see how these properties hold for insertion sort.
Initialization:  W e start by showing that the loop invariant holds before the
first loop iteration, when i  = 2.2 The subarray A [1 : i  – 1] consists of just
the single element A [1], which is in fact the original element in A [1].
Moreover , this subarray is sorted (after all, how could a subarray with just
one value not be sorted?), which shows that the loop invariant holds prior
to the first iteration of the loop.
Maintenance:  Next, we tackle the second property: showing that each
iteration maintains the loop invariant. Informally , the body of the for  loop
works by moving the values in A [ i  – 1], A [ i  – 2], A [ i  – 3], and so on by
one position to the right until it finds the proper position for A [ i ] (lines 4–
7), at which point it inserts the value of A [ i ] (line 8). The subarray A [1 : i ]
then consists of the elements originally in A [1 : i ], but in sorted order .
Incrementing  i  (increasing its value by 1) for the next iteration of the for
loop then preserves the loop invariant.
A more formal treatment of the second property would require us to state
and show a loop invariant for the while  loop of lines 5–7. Let’ s not get
bogged down in such formalism just yet. Instead, we’ll rely on our
informal analysis to show that the second property holds for the outer
loop.
T ermination:  Finally , we examine loop termination. The loop variable i
starts at 2 and increases by 1 in each iteration. Once i ’ s value exceeds n  in
line 1, the loop terminates. That is, the loop terminates once i  equals n  +
1. Substituting n  + 1 for i  in the wording of the loop invariant yields that
the subarray A [1 : n ] consists of the elements originally in A [1 : n ], but in
sorted order . Hence, the algorithm is correct.
Page number: 46
This method of loop invariants is used to show correctness in various
places throughout this book.
Pseudocode conventions
W e use the following conventions in our pseudocode.
Indentation indicates block structure. For example, the body of the
for  loop that begins on line 1 consists of lines 2–8, and the body of
the while  loop that begins on line 5 contains lines 6–7 but not line 8.
Our indentation style applies to if-else  statements3 as well. Using
indentation instead of textual indicators of block structure, such as
begin  and end  statements or curly braces, reduces clutter while
preserving, or even enhancing, clarity .4
The looping constructs while , for , and r epeat-until  and the if-else
conditional construct have interpretations similar to those in C, C++,
Java, Python, and JavaScript.5 In this book, the loop counter retains
its value after the loop is exited, unlike some situations that arise in
C++ and Java. Thus, immediately after a for  loop, the loop counter ’ s
value is the value that first exceeded the for  loop bound.6 W e used
this property in our correctness ar gument for insertion sort. The for
loop header in line 1 is for  i  = 2 to  n , and so when this loop
terminates, i  equals n  + 1. W e use the keyword to  when a for  loop
increments its loop counter in each iteration, and we use the keyword
downto  when a for  loop decrements  its loop counter (reduces its
value by 1 in each iteration). When the loop counter changes by an
amount greater than 1, the amount of change follows the optional
keyword by .
The symbol “ // ” indicates that the remainder of the line is a comment.
V ariables (such as i , j , and key ) are local to the given procedure. W e
won’ t use global variables without explicit indication.
W e access array elements by specifying the array name followed by
the index in square brackets. For example, A [ i ] indicates the i th
element of the array A .
Although many programming languages enforce 0-origin indexing
for arrays (0 is the smallest valid index), we choose whichever
Page number: 47
indexing scheme is clearest for human readers to understand. Because
people usually start counting at 1, not 0, most—but not all—of the
arrays in this book use 1-origin indexing. T o be clear about whether a
particular algorithm assumes 0-origin or 1-origin indexing, we’ll
specify the bounds of the arrays explicitly . If you are implementing
an algorithm that we specify using 1-origin indexing, but you’re
writing in a programming language that enforces 0-origin indexing
(such as C, C++, Java, Python, or JavaScript), then give yourself
credit for being able to adjust. Y ou can either always subtract 1 from
each index or allocate each array with one extra position and just
ignore position 0.
The notation “:” denotes a subarray . Thus, A [ i  : j ] indicates the
subarray of A  consisting of the elements A [ i ], A [ i  + 1], … , A [ j ].7 W e
also use this notation to indicate the bounds of an array , as we did
earlier when discussing the array A [1 : n ].
W e typically or ganize compound data into objects , which are
composed of attributes . W e access a particular attribute using the
syntax found in many object-oriented programming languages: the
object name, followed by a dot, followed by the attribute name. For
example, if an object x  has attribute f , we denote this attribute by x.f .
W e treat a variable representing an array or object as a pointer
(known as a reference in some programming languages) to the data
representing the array or object. For all attributes f  of an object x ,
setting y  = x  causes y .f  to equal x.f . Moreover , if we now set x.f  = 3,
then afterward not only does x.f  equal 3, but y .f  equals 3 as well. In
other words, x  and y  point to the same object after the assignment y  =
x . This way of treating arrays and objects is consistent with most
contemporary programming languages.
Our attribute notation can “cascade.” For example, suppose that the
attribute f  is itself a pointer to some type of object that has an
attribute g . Then the notation x.f.g  is implicitly parenthesized as
( x.f ). g . In other words, if we had assigned y  = x.f , then x.f.g  is the
same as y .g .
Sometimes a pointer refers to no object at all. In this case, we give it
the special value NIL .
Page number: 48
W e pass parameters to a procedure by value : the called procedure
receives its own copy of the parameters, and if it assigns a value to a
parameter , the change is not  seen by the calling procedure. When
objects are passed, the pointer to the data representing the object is
copied, but the object’ s attributes are not. For example, if x  is a
parameter of a called procedure, the assignment x  = y  within the
called procedure is not visible to the calling procedure. The
assignment x.f  = 3, however , is visible if the calling procedure has a
pointer to the same object as x . Similarly , arrays are passed by
pointer , so that a pointer to the array is passed, rather than the entire
array , and changes to individual array elements are visible to the
calling procedure. Again, most contemporary programming
languages work this way .
A r eturn  statement immediately transfers control back to the point of
call in the calling procedure. Most r eturn  statements also take a
value to pass back to the caller . Our pseudocode dif fers from many
programming languages in that we allow multiple values to be
returned in a single r eturn  statement without having to create objects
to package them together .8
The boolean operators “and” and “or” are short circuiting . That is,
evaluate the expression “ x  and y ” by first evaluating x . If x  evaluates
to F ALSE , then the entire expression cannot evaluate to TRUE , and
therefore y  is not evaluated. If, on the other hand, x  evaluates to TRUE ,
y  must be evaluated to determine the value of the entire expression.
Similarly , in the expression “ x  or y ” the expression y  is evaluated
only if x  evaluates to F ALSE . Short-circuiting operators allow us to
write boolean expressions such as “ x  ≠ NIL  and x.f  = y ” without
worrying about what happens upon evaluating x.f  when x  is NIL .
The keyword err or  indicates that an error occurred because
conditions were wrong for the procedure to have been called, and the
procedure immediately terminates. The calling procedure is
responsible for handling the error , and so we do not specify what
action to take.
Exer cises
Page number: 49
2.1-1
Using Figure 2.2  as a model, illustrate the operation of I NSER TION -S OR T  on
an array initially containing the sequence 〈 31, 41, 59, 26, 41, 58 〉 .
2.1-2
Consider the procedure S UM -A RRA Y  on the facing page. It computes the
sum of the n  numbers in array A [1 : n ]. State a loop invariant for this
procedure, and use its initialization, maintenance, and termination
properties to show that the S UM -A RRA Y  procedure returns the sum of the
numbers in A [1 : n ].
S UM -A RRA Y ( A, n )
1 sum  = 0
2 for  i  = 1 to  n
3 sum  = sum  + A [ i ]
4 r eturn  sum
2.1-3
Rewrite the I NSER TION -S OR T  procedure to sort into monotonically
decreasing instead of monotonically increasing order .
2.1-4
Consider the searching problem :
Input:  A sequence of n  numbers 〈 a1 , a2 , … , an〉  stored in array A [1 : n ] and
a value x .
Output:  An index i  such that x  equals A [ i ] or the special value NIL  if x  does
not appear in A .
W rite pseudocode for linear search , which scans through the array from
beginning to end, looking for x . Using a loop invariant, prove that your
algorithm is correct. Make sure that your loop invariant fulfills the three
necessary properties.
2.1-5
Consider the problem of adding two n -bit binary integers a  and b , stored in
two n -element arrays A [0 : n  – 1] and B [0 : n  – 1], where each element is
either 0 or 1, 
 , and 
 . The sum c  = a  + b  of
the two integers should be stored in binary form in an ( n  + 1)-element array
Page number: 50
C  [0 : n ], where 
 . W rite a procedure A DD -B INAR Y -I NTEGERS
that takes as input arrays A  and B , along with the length n , and returns array
C  holding the sum.
2.2      Analyzing algorithms
Analyzing  an algorithm has come to mean predicting the resources that the
algorithm requires. Y ou might consider resources such as memory ,
communication bandwidth, or ener gy consumption. Most often, however ,
you’ll want to measure computational time. If you analyze several
candidate algorithms for a problem, you can identify the most ef ficient one.
There might be more than just one viable candidate, but you can often rule
out several inferior algorithms in the process.
Before you can analyze an algorithm, you need a model of the
technology that it runs on, including the resources of that technology and a
way to express their costs. Most of this book assumes a generic one-
processor , random-access machine (RAM)  model of computation as the
implementation technology , with the understanding that algorithms are
implemented as computer programs. In the RAM model, instructions
execute one after another , with no concurrent operations. The RAM model
assumes that each instruction takes the same amount of time as any other
instruction and that each data access—using the value of a variable or
storing into a variable—takes the same amount of time as any other data
access. In other words, in the RAM model each instruction or data access
takes a constant amount of time—even indexing into an array .9
Strictly speaking, we should precisely define the instructions of the
RAM model and their costs. T o do so, however , would be tedious and yield
little insight into algorithm design and analysis. Y et we must be careful not
to abuse the RAM model. For example, what if a RAM had an instruction
that sorts? Then you could sort in just one step. Such a RAM would be
unrealistic, since such instructions do not appear in real computers. Our
guide, therefore, is how real computers are designed. The RAM model
contains instructions commonly found in real computers: arithmetic (such
as add, subtract, multiply , divide, remainder , floor , ceiling), data movement
(load, store, copy), and control (conditional and unconditional branch,
subroutine call and return).
Page number: 51
The data types in the RAM model are integer , floating point (for storing
real-number approximations), and character . Real computers do not usually
have a separate data type for the boolean values TRUE  and F ALSE . Instead,
they often test whether an integer value is 0 ( F ALSE ) or nonzero ( TRUE ), as in
C. Although we typically do not concern ourselves with precision for
floating-point values in this book (many numbers cannot be represented
exactly in floating point), precision is crucial for most applications. W e also
assume that each word of data has a limit on the number of bits. For
example, when working with inputs of size n , we typically assume that
integers are represented by c  log2  n  bits for some constant c  ≥ 1. W e require
c  ≥ 1 so that each word can hold the value of n , enabling us to index the
individual input elements, and we restrict c  to be a constant so that the word
size does not grow arbitrarily . (If the word size could grow arbitrarily , we
could store huge amounts of data in one word and operate on it all in
constant time—an unrealistic scenario.)
Real computers contain instructions not listed above, and such
instructions represent a gray area in the RAM model. For example, is
exponentiation a constant-time instruction? In the general case, no: to
compute xn when x  and n  are general integers typically takes time
logarithmic in n  (see equation (31.34) on page 934), and you must worry
about whether the result fits into a computer word. If n  is an exact power of
2, however , exponentiation can usually be viewed as a constant-time
operation. Many computers have a “shift left” instruction, which in constant
time shifts the bits of an integer by n  positions to the left. In most
computers, shifting the bits of an integer by 1 position to the left is
equivalent to multiplying by 2, so that shifting the bits by n  positions to the
left is equivalent to multiplying by 2n. Therefore, such computers can
compute 2n in 1 constant-time instruction by shifting the integer 1 by n
positions to the left, as long as n  is no more than the number of bits in a
computer word. W e’ll try to avoid such gray areas in the RAM model and
treat computing 2n and multiplying by 2n as constant-time operations when
the result is small enough to fit in a computer word.
The RAM model does not account for the memory hierarchy that is
common in contemporary computers. It models neither caches nor virtual
memory . Several other computational models attempt to account for
memory-hierarchy ef fects, which are sometimes significant in real
programs on real machines. Section 1 1.5  and a handful of problems in this
Page number: 52
book examine memory-hierarchy ef fects, but for the most part, the analyses
in this book do not consider them. Models that include the memory
hierarchy are quite a bit more complex than the RAM model, and so they
can be dif ficult to work with. Moreover , RAM-model analyses are usually
excellent predictors of performance on actual machines.
Although it is often straightforward to analyze an algorithm in the RAM
model, sometimes it can be quite a challenge. Y ou might need to employ
mathematical tools such as combinatorics, probability theory , algebraic
dexterity , and the ability to identify the most significant terms in a formula.
Because an algorithm might behave dif ferently for each possible input, we
need a means for summarizing that behavior in simple, easily understood
formulas.
Analysis of insertion sort
How long does the I NSER TION -S OR T  procedure take? One way to tell would
be for you to run it on your computer and time how long it takes to run. Of
course, you’d first have to implement it in a real programming language,
since you cannot run our pseudocode directly . What would such a timing
test tell you? Y ou would find out how long insertion sort takes to run on
your particular computer , on that particular input, under the particular
implementation that you created, with the particular compiler or interpreter
that you ran, with the particular libraries that you linked in, and with the
particular background tasks that were running on your computer
concurrently with your timing test (such as checking for incoming
information over a network). If you run insertion sort again on your
computer with the same input, you might even get a dif ferent timing result.
From running just one implementation of insertion sort on just one
computer and on just one input, what would you be able to determine about
insertion sort’ s running time if you were to give it a dif ferent input, if you
were to run it on a dif ferent computer , or if you were to implement it in a
dif ferent programming language? Not much. W e need a way to predict,
given a new input, how long insertion sort will take.
Instead of timing a run, or even several runs, of insertion sort, we can
determine how long it takes by analyzing the algorithm itself. W e’ll
examine how many times it executes each line of pseudocode and how long
each line of pseudocode takes to run. W e’ll first come up with a precise but
complicated formula for the running time. Then, we’ll distill the important
Page number: 53
part of the formula using a convenient notation that can help us compare the
running times of dif ferent algorithms for the same problem.
How do we analyze insertion sort? First, let’ s acknowledge that the
running time depends on the input. Y ou shouldn’ t be terribly surprised that
sorting a thousand numbers takes longer than sorting three numbers.
Moreover , insertion sort can take dif ferent amounts of time to sort two input
arrays of the same size, depending on how nearly sorted they already are.
Even though the running time can depend on many features of the input,
we’ll focus on the one that has been shown to have the greatest ef fect,
namely the size of the input, and describe the running time of a program as
a function of the size of its input. T o do so, we need to define the terms
“running time” and “input size” more carefully . W e also need to be clear
about whether we are discussing the running time for an input that elicits
the worst-case behavior , the best-case behavior , or some other case.
The best notion for input size  depends on the problem being studied. For
many problems, such as sorting or computing discrete Fourier transforms,
the most natural measure is the number of items in the input —for example,
the number n  of items being sorted. For many other problems, such as
multiplying two integers, the best measure of input size is the total number
of bits  needed to represent the input in ordinary binary notation. Sometimes
it is more appropriate to describe the size of the input with more than just
one number . For example, if the input to an algorithm is a graph, we usually
characterize the input size by both the number of vertices and the number of
edges in the graph. W e’ll indicate which input size measure is being used
with each problem we study .
The running time  of an algorithm on a particular input is the number of
instructions and data accesses executed. How we account for these costs
should be independent of any particular computer , but within the framework
of the RAM model. For the moment, let us adopt the following view . A
constant amount of time is required to execute each line of our pseudocode.
One line might take more or less time than another line, but we’ll assume
that each execution of the k th line takes ck  time, where ck  is a constant. This
viewpoint is in keeping with the RAM model, and it also reflects how the
pseudocode would be implemented on most actual computers.10
Let’ s analyze the I NSER TION -S OR T  procedure. As promised, we’ll start by
devising a precise formula that uses the input size and all the statement
costs ck . This formula turns out to be messy , however . W e’ll then switch to
Page number: 54
a simpler notation that is more concise and easier to use. This simpler
notation makes clear how to compare the running times of algorithms,
especially as the size of the input increases.
T o analyze the I NSER TION -S OR T  procedure, let’ s view it on the following
page with the time cost of each statement and the number of times each
statement is executed. For each i  = 2, 3, … , n , let ti  denote the number of
times the while  loop test in line 5 is executed for that value of i . When a for
or while  loop exits in the usual way—because the test in the loop header
comes up F ALSE —the test is executed one time more than the loop body .
Because comments are not executable statements, assume that they take no
time.
The running time of the algorithm is the sum of running times for each
statement executed. A statement that takes ck  steps to execute and executes
m  times contributes ck m  to the total running time.1 1 W e usually denote the
running time of an algorithm on an input of size n  by T  ( n ). T o compute T
( n ), the running time of I NSER TION -S OR T  on an input of n  values, we sum the
products of the cost  and times  columns, obtaining
I NSER TION -S OR T ( A, n ) cost times
1 for  i  = 2 to  n c 1 n
2 key  = A [ i ] c 2 n  – 1
3 //  Insert A [ i ] into the sorted subarray A [1 : i  – 1]. 0 n  – 1
4 j  = i  – 1 c 4 n  – 1
5 while  j  > 0 and A [ j ] > key c 5
6 A [ j  + 1] = A [ j ] c 6
7 j  = j  – 1 c 7
8 A [ j  + 1] = key c 8 n  – 1
Even for inputs of a given size, an algorithm’ s running time may depend
on which  input of that size is given. For example, in I NSER TION -S OR T , the
best case occurs when the array is already sorted. In this case, each time
that line 5 executes, the value of key —the value originally in A [ i ]—is
Page number: 55
already greater than or equal to all values in A [1 : i  – 1], so that the while
loop of lines 5–7 always exits upon the first test in line 5. Therefore, we
have that ti  = 1 for i  = 2, 3, … , n , and the best-case running time is given
by
W e can express this running time as an  + b  for constants a  and b  that
depend on the statement costs ck  (where a  = c1  + c2  + c4  + c5  + c8  and b  = c2
+ c4  + c5  + c8 ). The running time is thus a linear function  of n .
The worst case arises when the array is in reverse sorted order—that is,
it starts out in decreasing order . The procedure must compare each element
A [ i ] with each element in the entire sorted subarray A [1 : i  – 1], and so ti  = i
for i  = 2, 3, … , n . (The procedure finds that A [ j ] > key  every time in line 5,
and the while  loop exits only when j  reaches 0.) Noting that
and
we find that in the worst case, the running time of I NSER TION -S OR T  is

Page number: 56
W e can express this worst-case running time as an2 + bn  + c  for constants a ,
b , and c  that again depend on the statement costs ck  (now , a  = c5 /2 + c6 /2 +
c7 /2, b  = c1  + c2  + c4  + c5 /2 – c6 /2 – c7 /2 + c8 , and c  = –( c2  + c4  + c5  + c8 )).
The running time is thus a quadratic function  of n .
T ypically , as in insertion sort, the running time of an algorithm is fixed
for a given input, although we’ll also see some interesting “randomized”
algorithms whose behavior can vary even for a fixed input.
W orst-case and average-case analysis
Our analysis of insertion sort looked at both the best case, in which the
input array was already sorted, and the worst case, in which the input array
was reverse sorted. For the remainder of this book, though, we’ll usually
(but not always) concentrate on finding only the worst-case running time ,
that is, the longest running time for any  input of size n . Why? Here are three
reasons:
The worst-case running time of an algorithm gives an upper bound on
the running time for any  input. If you know it, then you have a
guarantee that the algorithm never takes any longer . Y ou need not
make some educated guess about the running time and hope that it
never gets much worse. This feature is especially important for real-
time computing, in which operations must complete by a deadline.
For some algorithms, the worst case occurs fairly often. For example,
in searching a database for a particular piece of information, the
searching algorithm’ s worst case often occurs when the information
is not present in the database. In some applications, searches for
absent information may be frequent.
The “average case” is often roughly as bad as the worst case.
Suppose that you run insertion sort on an array of n  randomly chosen
numbers. How long does it take to determine where in subarray A [1 :
i  – 1] to insert element A [ i ]? On average, half the elements in A [1 : i  –
1] are less than A [ i ], and half the elements are greater . On average,
therefore, A [ i ] is compared with just half of the subarray A [1 : i  – 1],
and so ti  is about i /2. The resulting average-case running time turns
out to be a quadratic function of the input size, just like the worst-
case running time.
Page number: 57
In some particular cases, we’ll be interested in the average-case  running
time of an algorithm. W e’ll see the technique of probabilistic analysis
applied to various algorithms throughout this book. The scope of average-
case analysis is limited, because it may not be apparent what constitutes an
“average” input for a particular problem. Often, we’ll assume that all inputs
of a given size are equally likely . In practice, this assumption may be
violated, but we can sometimes use a randomized algorithm , which makes
random choices, to allow a probabilistic analysis and yield an expected
running time. W e explore randomized algorithms more in Chapter 5  and in
several other subsequent chapters.
Order of gr owth
In order to ease our analysis of the I NSER TION -S OR T  procedure, we used
some simplifying abstractions. First, we ignored the actual cost of each
statement, using the constants ck  to represent these costs. Still, the best-case
and worst-case running times in equations (2.1) and (2.2) are rather
unwieldy . The constants in these expressions give us more detail than we
really need. That’ s why we also expressed the best-case running time as an
+ b  for constants a  and b  that depend on the statement costs ck  and why we
expressed the worst-case running time as an2 + bn  + c  for constants a , b ,
and c  that depend on the statement costs. W e thus ignored not only the
actual statement costs, but also the abstract costs ck .
Let’ s now make one more simplifying abstraction: it is the rate of
growth , or order of growth , of the running time that really interests us. W e
therefore consider only the leading term of a formula (e.g., an2), since the
lower -order terms are relatively insignificant for lar ge values of n . W e also
ignore the leading term’ s constant coef ficient, since constant factors are less
significant than the rate of growth in determining computational ef ficiency
for lar ge inputs. For insertion sort’ s worst-case running time, when we
ignore the lower -order terms and the leading term’ s constant coef ficient,
only the factor of n2 from the leading term remains. That factor , n2, is by far
the most important part of the running time. For example, suppose that an
algorithm implemented on a particular machine takes n2/100 + 100 n  + 17
microseconds on an input of size n . Although the coef ficients of 1/100 for
the n2 term and 100 for the n  term dif fer by four orders of magnitude, the
n2/100 term dominates the 100 n  term once n  exceeds 10,000. Although
Page number: 58
10,000 might seem lar ge, it is smaller than the population of an average
town. Many real-world problems have much lar ger input sizes.
T o highlight the order of growth of the running time, we have a special
notation that uses the Greek letter Θ (theta). W e write that insertion sort has
a worst-case running time of Θ( n2) (pronounced “theta of n -squared” or just
“theta n -squared”). W e also write that insertion sort has a best-case running
time of Θ( n ) (“theta of n ” or “theta n ”). For now , think of Θ-notation as
saying “roughly proportional when n  is lar ge,” so that Θ( n2) means
“roughly proportional to n2 when n  is lar ge” and Θ( n ) means “roughly
proportional to n  when n  is lar ge” W e’ll use Θ-notation informally in this
chapter and define it precisely in Chapter 3 .
W e usually consider one algorithm to be more ef ficient than another if
its worst-case running time has a lower order of growth. Due to constant
factors and lower -order terms, an algorithm whose running time has a
higher order of growth might take less time for small inputs than an
algorithm whose running time has a lower order of growth. But on lar ge
enough inputs, an algorithm whose worst-case running time is Θ( n2), for
example, takes less time in the worst case than an algorithm whose worst-
case running time is Θ( n3). Regardless of the constants hidden by the Θ-
notation, there is always some number , say n0 , such that for all input sizes n
≥ n0 , the Θ( n2) algorithm beats the Θ( n3) algorithm in the worst case.
Exer cises
2.2-1
Express the function n3/1000 + 100 n2 – 100 n  + 3 in terms of Θ-notation.
2.2-2
Consider sorting n  numbers stored in array A [1 : n ] by first finding the
smallest element of A [1 : n ] and exchanging it with the element in A [1].
Then find the smallest element of A [2 : n ], and exchange it with A [2]. Then
find the smallest element of A [3 : n ], and exchange it with A [3]. Continue in
this manner for the first n  – 1 elements of A . W rite pseudocode for this
algorithm, which is known as selection sort . What loop invariant does this
algorithm maintain? Why does it need to run for only the first n  – 1
elements, rather than for all n  elements? Give the worst-case running time
of selection sort in Θ-notation. Is the best-case running time any better?
Page number: 59
2.2-3
Consider linear search again (see Exercise 2.1-4). How many elements of
the input array need to be checked on the average, assuming that the
element being searched for is equally likely to be any element in the array?
How about in the worst case? Using Θ-notation, give the average-case and
worst-case running times of linear search. Justify your answers.
2.2-4
How can you modify any sorting algorithm to have a good best-case
running time?
2.3      Designing algorithms
Y ou can choose from a wide range of algorithm design techniques. Insertion
sort uses the incremental  method: for each element A [ i ], insert it into its
proper place in the subarray A [1 : i ], having already sorted the subarray A [1
: i  – 1].
This section examines another design method, known as “divide-and-
conquer ,” which we explore in more detail in Chapter 4 . W e’ll use divide-
and-conquer to design a sorting algorithm whose worst-case running time is
much less than that of insertion sort. One advantage of using an algorithm
that follows the divide-and-conquer method is that analyzing its running
time is often straightforward, using techniques that we’ll explore in Chapter
4 .
2.3.1    The divide-and-conquer method
Many useful algorithms are recursive  in structure: to solve a given problem,
they recurse  (call themselves) one or more times to handle closely related
subproblems. These algorithms typically follow the divide-and-conquer
method: they break the problem into several subproblems that are similar to
the original problem but smaller in size, solve the subproblems recursively ,
and then combine these solutions to create a solution to the original
problem.
In the divide-and-conquer method, if the problem is small enough—the
base case —you just solve it directly without recursing. Otherwise—the
recursive case —you perform three characteristic steps:
Page number: 60
Divide  the problem into one or more subproblems that are smaller instances
of the same problem.
Conquer  the subproblems by solving them recursively .
Combine  the subproblem solutions to form a solution to the original
problem.
The merge sort  algorithm closely follows the divide-and-conquer
method. In each step, it sorts a subarray A [ p  : r ], starting with the entire
array A [1 : n ] and recursing down to smaller and smaller subarrays. Here is
how mer ge sort operates:
Divide  the subarray A [ p  : r ] to be sorted into two adjacent subarrays, each
of half the size. T o do so, compute the midpoint q  of A [ p  : r ] (taking the
average of p  and r ), and divide A [ p  : r ] into subarrays A [ p  : q ] and A [ q  + 1
: r ].
Conquer  by sorting each of the two subarrays A [ p  : q ] and A [ q  + 1 : r ]
recursively using mer ge sort.
Combine  by mer ging the two sorted subarrays A [ p  : q ] and A [ q  + 1 : r ]
back into A [ p  : r ], producing the sorted answer .
The recursion “bottoms out”—it reaches the base case—when the subarray
A [ p  : r ] to be sorted has just 1 element, that is, when p  equals r . As we
noted in the initialization ar gument for I NSER TION -S OR T ’ s loop invariant, a
subarray comprising just a single element is always sorted.
The key operation of the mer ge sort algorithm occurs in the “combine”
step, which mer ges two adjacent, sorted subarrays. The mer ge operation is
performed by the auxiliary procedure M ERGE ( A , p , q , r ) on the following
page, where A  is an array and p , q , and r  are indices into the array such that
p  ≤ q  < r . The procedure assumes that the adjacent subarrays A [ p  : q ] and
A [ q  + 1 : r ] were already recursively sorted. It merges  the two sorted
subarrays to form a single sorted subarray that replaces the current subarray
A [ p  : r ].
T o understand how the M ERGE  procedure works, let’ s return to our card-
playing motif. Suppose that you have two piles of cards face up on a table.
Each pile is sorted, with the smallest-value cards on top. Y ou wish to mer ge
the two piles into a single sorted output pile, which is to be face down on
the table. The basic step consists of choosing the smaller of the two cards
Page number: 61
on top of the face-up piles, removing it from its pile—which exposes a new
top card—and placing this card face down onto the output pile. Repeat this
step until one input pile is empty , at which time you can just take the
remaining input pile and flip over the entire pile, placing it face down onto
the output pile.
Let’ s think about how long it takes to mer ge two sorted piles of cards.
Each basic step takes constant time, since you are comparing just the two
top cards. If the two sorted piles that you start with each have n /2 cards,
then the number of basic steps is at least n /2 (since in whichever pile was
emptied, every card was found to be smaller than some card from the other
pile) and at most n  (actually , at most n  – 1, since after n  – 1 basic steps, one
of the piles must be empty). W ith each basic step taking constant time and
the total number of basic steps being between n /2 and n , we can say that
mer ging takes time roughly proportional to n . That is, mer ging takes Θ( n )
time.
In detail, the M ERGE  procedure works as follows. It copies the two
subarrays A [ p  : q ] and A [ q  + 1 : r ] into temporary arrays L  and R  (“left” and
“right”), and then it mer ges the values in L  and R  back into A [ p  : r ]. Lines 1
and 2 compute the lengths nL  and nR  of the subarrays A [ p  : q ] and A [ q  + 1 :
r ], respectively . Then line 3 creates arrays L [0 : nL  – 1] and R [0 : nR  – 1]
with respective lengths nL  and nR .12 The for  loop of lines 4–5 copies the
subarray A [ p  : q ] into L , and the for  loop of lines 6–7 copies the subarray
A [ q  + 1 : r ] into R .
M ERGE ( A , p , q , r )
  1 n L  = q  – p  + 1 //  length of A [ p  : q ]
  2 n R  = r  – q //  length of A [ q  + 1 : r ]
  3 let L [0 : n L  – 1] and R [0 : n R  – 1] be new arrays
  4 for  i  = 0 to  n L  – 1 //  copy A [ p  : q ] into L [0 : n L  – 1]
  5 L [ i ] = A [ p  + i ]
  6 for  j  = 0 to  n R  – 1 //  copy A [ q  + 1 : r ] into R [0 : n R  – 1]
  7 R [ j ] = A [ q  + j  + 1]
  8 i  = 0 //  i  indexes the smallest remaining element in L
  9 j  = 0 //  j  indexes the smallest remaining element in R
10 k  = p //  k  indexes the location in A  to fill
1 1 //  As long as each of the arrays L  and R  contains an unmer ged element,  
//           copy the smallest unmer ged element back into A [ p  : r ].
12 while  i  < n L  and j  < n R
13 if  L [ i ] ≤ R [ j ]
Page number: 62
14 A [ k ] = L [ i ]
15 i  = i  + 1
16 else  A [ k ] = R [ j ]
17 j  = j  + 1
18 k  = k  + 1
19 //  Having gone through one of L  and R  entirely , copy the  
//           remainder of the other to the end of A [ p  : r ].
20 while  i  < n L
21 A [ k ] = L [ i ]
22 i  = i  + 1
23 k  = k  + 1
24 while  j  < n R
25 A [ k ] = R [ j ]
26 j  = j  + 1
27 k  = k  + 1
Lines 8–18, illustrated in Figure 2.3 , perform the basic steps. The while
loop of lines 12–18 repeatedly identifies the smallest value in L  and R  that
has yet to be copied back into A [ p  : r ] and copies it back in. As the
comments indicate, the index k  gives the position of A  that is being filled in,
and the indices i  and j  give the positions in L  and R , respectively , of the
smallest remaining values. Eventually , either all of L  or all of R  is copied
back into A [ p  : r ], and this loop terminates. If the loop terminates because
all of R  has been copied back, that is, because j  equals nR , then i  is still less
than nL , so that some of L  has yet to be copied back, and these values are
the greatest in both L  and R . In this case, the while  loop of lines 20–23
copies these remaining values of L  into the last few positions of A [ p  : r ].
Because j  equals nR , the while  loop of lines 24–27 iterates 0 times. If
instead the while  loop of lines 12–18 terminates because i  equals nL , then
all of L  has already been copied back into A [ p  : r ], and the while  loop of
lines 24–27 copies the remaining values of R  back into the end of A [ p  : r ].
Page number: 63
Figur e 2.3  The operation of the while  loop in lines 8–18 in the call M ERGE ( A , 9, 12, 16), when the
subarray A [9 : 16] contains the values 〈 2, 4, 6, 7, 1, 2, 3, 5 〉 . After allocating and copying into the
arrays L  and R , the array L  contains 〈 2, 4, 6, 7 〉 , and the array R  contains 〈 1, 2, 3, 5 〉 . T an positions in
A  contain their final values, and tan positions in L  and R  contain values that have yet to be copied
back into A . T aken together , the tan positions always comprise the values originally in A [9 : 16]. Blue
positions in A  contain values that will be copied over , and dark positions in L  and R  contain values
that have already been copied back into A . (a)–(g)  The arrays A , L , and R , and their respective indices
k , i , and j  prior to each iteration of the loop of lines 12–18. At the point in part (g), all values in R
have been copied back into A  (indicated by j  equaling the length of R ), and so the while  loop in lines
12–18 terminates. (h)  The arrays and indices at termination. The while  loops of lines 20–23 and 24–
27 copied back into A  the remaining values in L  and R , which are the lar gest values originally in A [9 :
16]. Here, lines 20–23 copied L [2 : 3] into A [15 : 16], and because all values in R  had already been
copied back into A , the while  loop of lines 24–27 iterated 0 times. At this point, the subarray in A [9 :
16] is sorted.
Page number: 64
T o see that the M ERGE  procedure runs in Θ( n ) time, where n  = r  – p  +
1,13 observe that each of lines 1–3 and 8–10 takes constant time, and the for
loops of lines 4–7 take Θ( nL  + nR ) = Θ( n ) time.14 T o account for the three
while  loops of lines 12–18, 20–23, and 24–27, observe that each iteration of
these loops copies exactly one value from L  or R  back into A  and that every
value is copied back into A  exactly once. Therefore, these three loops
together make a total of n  iterations. Since each iteration of each of the
three loops takes constant time, the total time spent in these three loops is
Θ( n ).
W e can now use the M ERGE  procedure as a subroutine in the mer ge sort
algorithm. The procedure M ERGE -S OR T ( A , p , r ) on the facing page sorts the
elements in the subarray A [ p  : r ]. If p  equals r , the subarray has just 1
element and is therefore already sorted. Otherwise, we must have p  < r , and
M ERGE -S OR T  runs the divide, conquer , and combine steps. The divide step
simply computes an index q  that partitions A [ p  : r ] into two adjacent
subarrays: A [ p  : q ], containing ⌈ n /2 ⌉  elements, and A [ q  + 1 : r ], containing
⌊ n /2 ⌋  elements.15 The initial call M ERGE -S OR T ( A,  1, n ) sorts the entire array
A [1 : n ].
Figure 2.4  illustrates the operation of the procedure for n  = 8, showing
also the sequence of divide and mer ge steps. The algorithm recursively
divides the array down to 1-element subarrays. The combine steps mer ge
pairs of 1-element subarrays to form sorted subarrays of length 2, mer ges
those to form sorted subarrays of length 4, and mer ges those to form the
final sorted subarray of length 8. If n  is not an exact power of 2, then some
divide steps create subarrays whose lengths dif fer by 1. (For example, when
dividing a subarray of length 7, one subarray has length 4 and the other has
length 3.) Regardless of the lengths of the two subarrays being mer ged, the
time to mer ge a total of n  items is Θ( n ).
M ERGE -S OR T ( A , p , r )
1 if  p  ≥ r //  zero or one element?
2 r eturn
3 q  = ⌊ ( p  + r )/2 ⌋ //  midpoint of A [ p  : r ]
4 M ERGE -S OR T ( A , p , q ) //  recursively sort A [ p  : q ]
5 M ERGE -S OR T ( A , q  + 1, r ) //  recursively sort A [ q  + 1 : r ]
6 //  Mer ge A [ p  : q ] and A [ q  + 1 : r ] into A [ p  : r ].
7 M ERGE ( A , p , q , r )
Page number: 65
2.3.2    Analyzing divide-and-conquer algorithms
When an algorithm contains a recursive call, you can often describe its
running time by a recurrence equation  or recurrence , which describes the
overall running time on a problem of size n  in terms of the running time of
the same algorithm on smaller inputs. Y ou can then use mathematical tools
to solve the recurrence and provide bounds on the performance of the
algorithm.
A recurrence for the running time of a divide-and-conquer algorithm
falls out from the three steps of the basic method. As we did for insertion
sort, let T  ( n ) be the worst-case running time on a problem of size n . If the
problem size is small enough, say n  < n0  for some constant n0  > 0, the
straightforward solution takes constant time, which we write as Θ(1).16
Suppose that the division of the problem yields a  subproblems, each with
size n / b , that is, 1/ b  the size of the original. For mer ge sort, both a  and b  are
2, but we’ll see other divide-and-conquer algorithms in which a  ≠ b . It takes
T  ( n / b ) time to solve one subproblem of size n / b , and so it takes aT  ( n / b )
time to solve all a  of them. If it takes D ( n ) time to divide the problem into
subproblems and C ( n ) time to combine the solutions to the subproblems
into the solution to the original problem, we get the recurrence
Chapter 4  shows how to solve common recurrences of this form.
Page number: 66
Figur e 2.4  The operation of mer ge sort on the array A  with length 8 that initially contains the
sequence 〈 12, 3, 7, 9, 14, 6, 1 1, 2 〉 . The indices p , q , and r  into each subarray appear above their
values. Numbers in italics indicate the order in which the M ERGE -S OR T  and M ERGE  procedures
are called following the initial call of M ERGE -S OR T ( A,  1, 8).
Sometimes, the n / b  size of the divide step isn’ t an integer . For example,
the M ERGE -S OR T  procedure divides a problem of size n  into subproblems of
sizes ⌈ n /2 ⌉  and ⌊ n /2 ⌋ . Since the dif ference between ⌈ n /2 ⌉  and ⌊ n /2 ⌋  is at
most 1, which for lar ge n  is much smaller than the ef fect of dividing n  by 2,
we’ll squint a little and just call them both size n /2. As Chapter 4  will
discuss, this simplification of ignoring floors and ceilings does not
Page number: 67
generally af fect the order of growth of a solution to a divide-and-conquer
recurrence.
Another convention we’ll adopt is to omit a statement of the base cases
of the recurrence, which we’ll also discuss in more detail in Chapter 4 . The
reason is that the base cases are pretty much always T  ( n ) = Θ(1) if n  < n0
for some constant n0  > 0. That’ s because the running time of an algorithm
on an input of constant size is constant. W e save ourselves a lot of extra
writing by adopting this convention.
Analysis of merge sort
Here’ s how to set up the recurrence for T  ( n ), the worst-case running time of
mer ge sort on n  numbers.
Divide:  The divide step just computes the middle of the subarray , which
takes constant time. Thus, D ( n ) = Θ(1).
Conquer:  Recursively solving two subproblems, each of size n /2,
contributes 2 T  ( n /2) to the running time (ignoring the floors and ceilings,
as we discussed).
Combine:  Since the M ERGE  procedure on an n -element subarray takes Θ( n )
time, we have C ( n ) = Θ( n ).
When we add the functions D ( n ) and C ( n ) for the mer ge sort analysis,
we are adding a function that is Θ( n ) and a function that is Θ(1). This sum
is a linear function of n . That is, it is roughly proportional to n  when n  is
lar ge, and so mer ge sort’ s dividing and combining times together are Θ( n ).
Adding Θ( n ) to the 2 T  ( n /2) term from the conquer step gives the recurrence
for the worst-case running time T  ( n ) of mer ge sort:
Chapter 4  presents the “master theorem,” which shows that T  ( n ) = Θ( n  lg
n ).17 Compared with insertion sort, whose worst-case running time is Θ( n2),
mer ge sort trades away a factor of n  for a factor of lg n . Because the
logarithm function grows more slowly than any linear function, that’ s a
good trade. For lar ge enough inputs, mer ge sort, with its Θ( n  lg n ) worst-
case running time, outperforms insertion sort, whose worst-case running
time is Θ( n2).
Page number: 68
W e do not need the master theorem, however , to understand intuitively
why the solution to recurrence (2.3) is T  ( n ) = Θ( n  lg n ). For simplicity ,
assume that n  is an exact power of 2 and that the implicit base case is n  = 1.
Then recurrence (2.3) is essentially
where the constant c1  > 0 represents the time required to solve a problem of
size 1, and c2  > 0 is the time per array element of the divide and combine
steps.18
Figure 2.5  illustrates one way of figuring out the solution to recurrence
(2.4). Part (a) of the figure shows T  ( n ), which part (b) expands into an
equivalent tree representing the recurrence. The c2 n  term denotes the cost of
dividing and combining at the top level of recursion, and the two subtrees
of the root are the two smaller recurrences T  ( n /2). Part (c) shows this
process carried one step further by expanding T  ( n /2). The cost for dividing
and combining at each of the two nodes at the second level of recursion is
c2 n /2. Continue to expand each node in the tree by breaking it into its
constituent parts as determined by the recurrence, until the problem sizes
get down to 1, each with a cost of c1 . Part (d) shows the resulting recursion
tree .
Next, add the costs across each level of the tree. The top level has total
cost c2 n , the next level down has total cost c2 ( n /2) + c2 ( n /2) = c2 n , the level
after that has total cost c2 ( n /4) + c2 ( n /4) + c2 ( n /4) + c2 ( n /4) = c2 n , and so on.
Each level has twice as many nodes as the level above, but each node
contributes only half the cost of a node from the level above. From one
level to the next, doubling and halving cancel each other out, so that the
cost across each level is the same: c2 n . In general, the level that is i  levels
below the top has 2i nodes, each contributing a cost of c2 ( n /2i), so that the
i th level below the top has total cost 2i · c2 ( n /2i) = c2 n . The bottom level has
n  nodes, each contributing a cost of c1 , for a total cost of c1 n .
The total number of levels of the recursion tree in Figure 2.5  is lg n  + 1,
where n  is the number of leaves, corresponding to the input size. An
informal inductive ar gument justifies this claim. The base case occurs when
Page number: 69
n  = 1, in which case the tree has only 1 level. Since lg 1 = 0, we have that lg
n  + 1 gives the correct number of levels. Now assume as an inductive
hypothesis that the number of levels of a recursion tree with 2i leaves is lg
2i + 1 = i  + 1 (since for any value of i , we have that lg 2i = i ). Because we
assume that the input size is an exact power of 2, the next input size to
consider is 2i  + 1. A tree with n  = 2i  + 1 leaves has 1 more level than a tree
with 2i leaves, and so the total number of levels is ( i  + 1) + 1 = lg 2i  + 1 + 1.
Page number: 70
Figur e 2.5  How to construct a recursion tree for the recurrence (2.4). Part (a)  shows T  ( n ), which
progressively expands in (b)–(d)  to form the recursion tree. The fully expanded tree in part (d) has lg
n  + 1 levels. Each level above the leaves contributes a total cost of c 2 n , and the leaf level contributes
c 1 n . The total cost, therefore, is c 2 n  lg n  + c 1 n  = Θ( n  lg n ).
Page number: 71
T o compute the total cost represented by the recurrence (2.4), simply
add up the costs of all the levels. The recursion tree has lg n  + 1 levels. The
levels above the leaves each cost c2 n , and the leaf level costs c1 n , for a total
cost of c2 n  lg n  + c1 n  = Θ( n  lg n ).
Exer cises
2.3-1
Using Figure 2.4  as a model, illustrate the operation of mer ge sort on an
array initially containing the sequence 〈 3, 41, 52, 26, 38, 57, 9, 49 〉 .
2.3-2
The test in line 1 of the M ERGE -S OR T  procedure reads “ if  p  ≥ r ” rather than
“ if  p  ≠ r .” If M ERGE -S OR T  is called with p  > r , then the subarray A [ p  : r ] is
empty . Ar gue that as long as the initial call of M ERGE -S OR T ( A,  1, n ) has n  ≥
1, the test “ if  p  ≠ r ” suf fices to ensure that no recursive call has p  > r .
2.3-3
State a loop invariant for the while  loop of lines 12–18 of the M ERGE
procedure. Show how to use it, along with the while  loops of lines 20–23
and 24–27, to prove that the M ERGE  procedure is correct.
2.3-4
Use mathematical induction to show that when n  ≥ 2 is an exact power of 2,
the solution of the recurrence
is T ( n ) = n  lg n .
2.3-5
Y ou can also think of insertion sort as a recursive algorithm. In order to sort
A [1 : n ], recursively sort the subarray A [1 : n  – 1] and then insert A [ n ] into
the sorted subarray A [1 : n  – 1]. W rite pseudocode for this recursive version
of insertion sort. Give a recurrence for its worst-case running time.
2.3-6
Page number: 72
Referring back to the searching problem (see Exercise 2.1-4), observe that
if the subarray being searched is already sorted, the searching algorithm can
check the midpoint of the subarray against v  and eliminate half of the
subarray from further consideration. The binary search  algorithm repeats
this procedure, halving the size of the remaining portion of the subarray
each time. W rite pseudocode, either iterative or recursive, for binary search.
Ar gue that the worst-case running time of binary search is Θ(lg n ).
2.3-7
The while  loop of lines 5–7 of the I NSER TION -S OR T  procedure in Section 2.1
uses a linear search to scan (backward) through the sorted subarray A [1 : j  –
1]. What if insertion sort used a binary search (see Exercise 2.3-6) instead
of a linear search? W ould that improve the overall worst-case running time
of insertion sort to Θ( n  lg n )?
2.3-8
Describe an algorithm that, given a set S  of n  integers and another integer x ,
determines whether S  contains two elements that sum to exactly x . Y our
algorithm should take Θ( n  lg n ) time in the worst case.
Pr oblems
2-1     Insertion sort on small arrays in merge sort
Although mer ge sort runs in Θ( n  lg n ) worst-case time and insertion sort
runs in Θ( n2) worst-case time, the constant factors in insertion sort can
make it faster in practice for small problem sizes on many machines. Thus
it makes sense to coarsen  the leaves of the recursion by using insertion sort
within mer ge sort when subproblems become suf ficiently small. Consider a
modification to mer ge sort in which n / k  sublists of length k  are sorted using
insertion sort and then mer ged using the standard mer ging mechanism,
where k  is a value to be determined.
a.  Show that insertion sort can sort the n / k  sublists, each of length k , in
Θ( nk ) worst-case time.
b.  Show how to mer ge the sublists in Θ( n  lg( n / k )) worst-case time.
Page number: 73
c.  Given that the modified algorithm runs in Θ( nk  + n  lg( n / k )) worst-case
time, what is the lar gest value of k  as a function of n  for which the
modified algorithm has the same running time as standard mer ge sort, in
terms of Θ-notation?
d.  How should you choose k  in practice?
2-2     Correctness of bubblesort
Bubblesort is a popular , but inef ficient, sorting algorithm. It works by
repeatedly swapping adjacent elements that are out of order . The procedure
B UBBLESOR T  sorts array A [1 : n ].
B UBBLESOR T ( A , n )
1 for  i  = 1 to  n  – 1
2 for  j  = n  downto  i  + 1
3 if  A [ j ] < A [ j  – 1]
4 exchange A [ j ] with A [ j  – 1]
a.  Let A′ denote the array A  after B UBBLESOR T ( A , n ) is executed. T o prove
that
In order to show that B UBBLESOR T  actually sorts, what else do you need to
prove?
The next two parts prove inequality (2.5).
b.  State precisely a loop invariant for the for  loop in lines 2–4, and prove
that this loop invariant holds. Y our proof should use the structure of the
loop-invariant proof presented in this chapter .
c.  Using the termination condition of the loop invariant proved in part (b),
state a loop invariant for the for  loop in lines 1–4 that allows you to prove
inequality (2.5). Y our proof should use the structure of the loop-invariant
proof presented in this chapter .
d.  What is the worst-case running time of B UBBLESOR T ? How does it
compare with the running time of I NSER TION -S OR T ?
2-3     Correctness of Horner ’ s rule
Page number: 74
Y ou are given the coef ficents a0 , a1 , a2 , … , an  of a polynomial
and you want to evaluate this polynomial for a given value of x . Horner ’ s
rule  says to evaluate the polynomial according to this parenthesization:
The procedure H ORNER  implements Horner ’ s rule to evaluate P ( x ), given
the coef ficients a0 , a1 , a2 , … , an  in an array A [0 : n ] and the value of x .
H ORNER ( A, n, x )
1 p  = 0
2 for  i  = n  downto  0
3 p  = A [ i ] + x  · p
4 r eturn  p
a.  In terms of Θ-notation, what is the running time of this procedure?
b.  W rite pseudocode to implement the naive polynomial-evaluation
algorithm that computes each term of the polynomial from scratch. What
is the running time of this algorithm? How does it compare with H ORNER ?
c.  Consider the following loop invariant for the procedure H ORNER :
At the start of each iteration of the for  loop of lines 2–3,
Interpret a summation with no terms as equaling 0. Following the
structure of the loop-invariant proof presented in this chapter , use this
loop invariant to show that, at termination, 
 .
2-4     Inversions
Let A [1 : n ] be an array of n  distinct numbers. If i  < j  and A [ i ] > A [ j ], then
the pair ( i, j ) is called an inversion  of A .
Page number: 75
a.  List the five inversions of the array 〈 2, 3, 8, 6, 1 〉 .
b.  What array with elements from the set {1, 2, … , n } has the most
inversions? How many does it have?
c.  What is the relationship between the running time of insertion sort and
the number of inversions in the input array? Justify your answer .
d.  Give an algorithm that determines the number of inversions in any
permutation on n  elements in Θ( n  lg n ) worst-case time. ( Hint:  Modify
mer ge sort.)
Chapter notes
In 1968, Knuth published the first of three volumes with the general title
The Art of Computer Pr ogramming  [ 259 , 260 , 261 ]. The first volume
ushered in the modern study of computer algorithms with a focus on the
analysis of running time. The full series remains an engaging and
worthwhile reference for many of the topics presented here. According to
Knuth, the word “algorithm” is derived from the name “al-Khowârizmî,” a
ninth-century Persian mathematician.
Aho, Hopcroft, and Ullman [ 5 ] advocated the asymptotic analysis of
algorithms—using notations that Chapter 3  introduces, including Θ-
notation—as a means of comparing relative performance. They also
popularized the use of recurrence relations to describe the running times of
recursive algorithms.
Knuth [ 261 ] provides an encyclopedic treatment of many sorting
algorithms. His comparison of sorting algorithms (page 381) includes exact
step-counting analyses, like the one we performed here for insertion sort.
Knuth’ s discussion of insertion sort encompasses several variations of the
algorithm. The most important of these is Shell’ s sort, introduced by D. L.
Shell, which uses insertion sort on periodic subarrays of the input to
produce a faster sorting algorithm.
Mer ge sort is also described by Knuth. He mentions that a mechanical
collator capable of mer ging two decks of punched cards in a single pass was
invented in 1938. J. von Neumann, one of the pioneers of computer science,
apparently wrote a program for mer ge sort on the EDV AC computer in
1945.
Page number: 76
The early history of proving programs correct is described by Gries
[ 200 ], who credits P . Naur with the first article in this field. Gries attributes
loop invariants to R. W . Floyd. The textbook by Mitchell [ 329 ] is a good
reference on how to prove programs correct.
1 If you’re familiar with only Python, you can think of arrays as similar to Python lists.
2 When the loop is a for  loop, the loop-invariant check just prior to the first iteration occurs
immediately after the initial assignment to the loop-counter variable and just before the first test in
the loop header . In the case of I NSER TION -S OR T , this time is after assigning 2 to the variable i  but
before the first test of whether i  ≤ n .
3 In an if-else  statement, we indent else  at the same level as its matching if . The first executable line
of an else  clause appears on the same line as the keyword else . For multiway tests, we use elseif  for
tests after the first one. When it is the first line in an else  clause, an if  statement appears on the line
following else  so that you do not misconstrue it as elseif .
4 Each pseudocode procedure in this book appears on one page so that you do not need to discern
levels of indentation in pseudocode that is split across pages.
5 Most block-structured languages have equivalent constructs, though the exact syntax may dif fer .
Python lacks r epeat-until  loops, and its for  loops operate dif ferently from the for  loops in this book.
Think of the pseudocode line “ for  i  = 1 to  n ” as equivalent to “for i in range(1, n+1)” in Python.
6 In Python, the loop counter retains its value after the loop is exited, but the value it retains is the
value it had during the final iteration of the for  loop, rather than the value that exceeded the loop
bound. That is because a Python for  loop iterates through a list, which may contain nonnumeric
values.
7 If you’re used to programming in Python, bear in mind that in this book, the subarray A [ i  : j ]
includes the element A [ j ]. In Python, the last element of A [ i  : j ] is A [ j  – 1]. Python allows negative
indices, which count from the back end of the list. This book does not use negative array indices.
8 Python’ s tuple notation allows r eturn  statements to return multiple values without creating objects
from a programmer -defined class.
9 W e assume that each element of a given array occupies the same number of bytes and that the
elements of a given array are stored in contiguous memory locations. For example, if array A [1 : n ]
starts at memory address 1000 and each element occupies four bytes, then element A [ i ] is at address
1000 + 4( i  – 1). In general, computing the address in memory of a particular array element requires at
most one subtraction (no subtraction for a 0-origin array), one multiplication (often implemented as a
shift operation if the element size is an exact power of 2), and one addition. Furthermore, for code
that iterates through the elements of an array in order , an optimizing compiler can generate the
address of each element using just one addition, by adding the element size to the address of the
preceding element.
10 There are some subtleties here. Computational steps that we specify in English are often variants
of a procedure that requires more than just a constant amount of time. For example, in the R ADIX -
S OR T  procedure on page 213, one line reads “use a stable sort to sort array A  on digit i ,” which, as
Page number: 77
we shall see, takes more than a constant amount of time. Also, although a statement that calls a
subroutine takes only constant time, the subroutine itself, once invoked, may take more. That is, we
separate the process of calling  the subroutine—passing parameters to it, etc.—from the process of
executing  the subroutine.
1 1 This characteristic does not necessarily hold for a resource such as memory . A statement that
references m  words of memory and is executed n  times does not necessarily reference mn  distinct
words of memory .
12 This procedure is the rare case that uses both 1-origin indexing (for array A ) and 0-origin indexing
(for arrays L  and R ). Using 0-origin indexing for L  and R  makes for a simpler loop invariant in
Exercise 2.3-3.
13 If you’re wondering where the “+1” comes from, imagine that r  = p  + 1. Then the subarray A [ p  :
r ] consists of two elements, and r  – p  + 1 = 2.
14 Chapter 3  shows how to formally interpret equations containing Θ-notation.
15 The expression ⌈ x ⌉  denotes the least integer greater than or equal to x , and ⌊ x ⌋  denotes the greatest
integer less than or equal to x . These notations are defined in Section 3.3 . The easiest way to verify
that setting q  to ⌊ ( p  + r )/2 ⌋  yields subarrays A [ p  : q ] and A [ q  + 1 : r ] of sizes ⌈ n /2 ⌉  and ⌊ n /2 ⌋ ,
respectively , is to examine the four cases that arise depending on whether each of p  and r  is odd or
even.
16 If you’re wondering where Θ(1) comes from, think of it this way . When we say that n2/100 is
Θ( n2), we are ignoring the coef ficient 1/100 of the factor n2. Likewise, when we say that a constant c
is Θ(1), we are ignoring the coef ficient c  of the factor 1 (which you can also think of as n0).
17 The notation lg n  stands for log 2  n , although the base of the logarithm doesn’ t matter here, but as
computer scientists, we like logarithms base 2. Section 3.3  discusses other standard notation.
18 It is unlikely that c 1  is exactly the time to solve problems of size 1 and that c 2 n  is exactly the time
of the divide and combine steps. W e’ll look more closely at bounding recurrences in Chapter 4 ,
where we’ll be more careful about this kind of detail.
Page number: 78
3          Characterizing Running T imes
The order of growth of the running time of an algorithm, defined in Chapter
2 , gives a simple way to characterize the algorithm’ s ef ficiency and also
allows us to compare it with alternative algorithms. Once the input size n
becomes lar ge enough, mer ge sort, with its Θ( n  lg n ) worst-case running
time, beats insertion sort, whose worst-case running time is Θ( n2). Although
we can sometimes determine the exact running time of an algorithm, as we
did for insertion sort in Chapter 2 , the extra precision is rarely worth the
ef fort of computing it. For lar ge enough inputs, the multiplicative constants
and lower -order terms of an exact running time are dominated by the ef fects
of the input size itself.
When we look at input sizes lar ge enough to make relevant only the
order of growth of the running time, we are studying the asymptotic
ef ficiency of algorithms. That is, we are concerned with how the running
time of an algorithm increases with the size of the input in the limit , as the
size of the input increases without bound. Usually , an algorithm that is
asymptotically more ef ficient is the best choice for all but very small inputs.
This chapter gives several standard methods for simplifying the
asymptotic analysis of algorithms. The next section presents informally the
three most commonly used types of “asymptotic notation,” of which we
have already seen an example in Θ-notation. It also shows one way to use
these asymptotic notations to reason about the worst-case running time of
insertion sort. Then we look at asymptotic notations more formally and
present several notational conventions used throughout this book. The last
section reviews the behavior of functions that commonly arise when
analyzing algorithms.
Page number: 79
3.1      O -notation, Ω-notation, and Θ-notation
When we analyzed the worst-case running time of insertion sort in Chapter
2 , we started with the complicated expression
W e then discarded the lower -order terms ( c1  + c2  + c4  + c5 /2 – c6 /2 – c7 /2 +
c8 ) n  and c2  + c4  + c5  + c8 , and we also ignored the coef ficient c5 /2 + c6 /2 +
c7 /2 of n2. That left just the factor n2, which we put into Θ-notation as
Θ( n2). W e use this style to characterize running times of algorithms: discard
the lower -order terms and the coef ficient of the leading term, and use a
notation that focuses on the rate of growth of the running time.
Θ-notation is not the only such “asymptotic notation.” In this section,
we’ll see other forms of asymptotic notation as well. W e start with intuitive
looks at these notations, revisiting insertion sort to see how we can apply
them. In the next section, we’ll see the formal definitions of our asymptotic
notations, along with conventions for using them.
Before we get into specifics, bear in mind that the asymptotic notations
we’ll see are designed so that they characterize functions in general. It so
happens that the functions we are most interested in denote the running
times of algorithms. But asymptotic notation can apply to functions that
characterize some other aspect of algorithms (the amount of space they use,
for example), or even to functions that have nothing whatsoever to do with
algorithms.
O -notation
O -notation characterizes an upper bound  on the asymptotic behavior of a
function. In other words, it says that a function grows no faster  than a
certain rate, based on the highest-order term. Consider , for example, the
function 7 n3 + 100 n2 – 20 n  + 6. Its highest-order term is 7 n3, and so we say
that this function’ s rate of growth is n3. Because this function grows no
faster than n3, we can write that it is O ( n3). Y ou might be surprised that we
can also write that the function 7 n3 + 100 n2 – 20 n  + 6 is O ( n4). Why?
Because the function grows more slowly than n4, we are correct in saying
Page number: 80
that it grows no faster . As you might have guessed, this function is also
O ( n5), O ( n6), and so on. More generally , it is O ( nc) for any constant c  ≥ 3.
Ω-notation
Ω-notation characterizes a lower bound  on the asymptotic behavior of a
function. In other words, it says that a function grows at least as fast  as a
certain rate, based — as in O -notation—on the highest-order term. Because
the highest-order term in the function 7 n3 + 100 n2 – 20 n  + 6 grows at least
as fast as n3, this function is Ω( n3). This function is also Ω( n2) and Ω( n ).
More generally , it is Ω( nc) for any constant c  ≤ 3.
Θ-notation
Θ-notation characterizes a tight bound  on the asymptotic behavior of a
function. It says that a function grows pr ecisely  at a certain rate, based—
once again—on the highest-order term. Put another way , Θ-notation
characterizes the rate of growth of the function to within a constant factor
from above and to within a constant factor from below . These two constant
factors need not be equal.
If you can show that a function is both O ( f  ( n )) and Ω( f  ( n )) for some
function f  ( n ), then you have shown that the function is Θ( f  ( n )). (The next
section states this fact as a theorem.) For example, since the function 7 n3 +
100 n2 – 20 n  + 6 is both O ( n3) and Ω( n3), it is also Θ( n3).
Example: Insertion sort
Let’ s revisit insertion sort and see how to work with asymptotic notation to
characterize its Θ( n2) worst-case running time without evaluating
summations as we did in Chapter 2 . Here is the I NSER TION -S OR T  procedure
once again:
I NSER TION -S OR T ( A , n )
1 for  i  = 2 to  n
2 key  = A [ i ]
3 //  Insert A [ i ] into the sorted subarray A [1 : i  – 1].
4 j  = i  – 1
5 while  j  > 0 and A [ j ] > key
6 A [ j  + 1] = A [ j ]
7 j  = j  – 1
Page number: 81
8 A [ j  + 1] = key
What can we observe about how the pseudocode operates? The
procedure has nested loops. The outer loop is a for  loop that runs n  – 1
times, regardless of the values being sorted. The inner loop is a while  loop,
but the number of iterations it makes depends on the values being sorted.
The loop variable j  starts at i  – 1 and decreases by 1 in each iteration until
either it reaches 0 or A [ j ] ≤ key . For a given value of i , the while  loop might
iterate 0 times, i  – 1 times, or anywhere in between. The body of the while
loop (lines 6–7) takes constant time per iteration of the while  loop.
Figur e 3.1  The Ω( n2) lower bound for insertion sort. If the first n /3 positions contain the n /3 lar gest
values, each of these values must move through each of the middle n /3 positions, one position at a
time, to end up somewhere in the last n /3 positions. Since each of n /3 values moves through at least
each of n /3 positions, the time taken in this case is at least proportional to ( n /3)( n /3) = n2/9, or Ω( n2).
These observations suf fice to deduce an O ( n2) running time for any case
of I NSER TION -S OR T , giving us a blanket statement that covers all inputs. The
running time is dominated by the inner loop. Because each of the n  – 1
iterations of the outer loop causes the inner loop to iterate at most i  – 1
times, and because i  is at most n , the total number of iterations of the inner
loop is at most ( n  – 1)( n  – 1), which is less than n2. Since each iteration of
the inner loop takes constant time, the total time spent in the inner loop is at
most a constant times n2, or O ( n2).
W ith a little creativity , we can also see that the worst-case running time
of I NSER TION -S OR T  is Ω( n2). By saying that the worst-case running time of
an algorithm is Ω( n2), we mean that for every input size n  above a certain
threshold, there is at least one input of size n  for which the algorithm takes
at least cn2 time, for some positive constant c . It does not necessarily mean
that the algorithm takes at least cn2 time for all inputs.
Let’ s now see why the worst-case running time of I NSER TION -S OR T  is
Ω( n2). For a value to end up to the right of where it started, it must have
Page number: 82
been moved in line 6. In fact, for a value to end up k  positions to the right of
where it started, line 6 must have executed k  times. As Figure 3.1  shows,
let’ s assume that n  is a multiple of 3 so that we can divide the array A  into
groups of n /3 positions. Suppose that in the input to I NSER TION -S OR T , the n /3
lar gest values occupy the first n /3 array positions A [1 : n /3]. (It does not
matter what relative order they have within the first n /3 positions.) Once the
array has been sorted, each of these n /3 values ends up somewhere in the
last n /3 positions A [2 n /3 + 1 : n ]. For that to happen, each of these n /3
values must pass through each of the middle n /3 positions A [ n /3 + 1 : 2 n /3].
Each of these n /3 values passes through these middle n /3 positions one
position at a time, by at least n /3 executions of line 6. Because at least n /3
values have to pass through at least n /3 positions, the time taken by
I NSER TION -S OR T  in the worst case is at least proportional to ( n /3)( n /3) =
n2/9, which is Ω( n2).
Because we have shown that I NSER TION -S OR T  runs in O ( n2) time in all
cases and that there is an input that makes it take Ω( n2) time, we can
conclude that the worst-case running time of I NSER TION -S OR T  is Θ( n2). It
does not matter that the constant factors for upper and lower bounds might
dif fer . What matters is that we have characterized the worst-case running
time to within constant factors (discounting lower -order terms). This
ar gument does not show that I NSER TION -S OR T  runs in Θ( n2) time in all
cases. Indeed, we saw in Chapter 2  that the best-case running time is Θ( n ).
Exer cises
3.1-1
Modify the lower -bound ar gument for insertion sort to handle input sizes
that are not necessarily a multiple of 3.
3.1-2
Using reasoning similar to what we used for insertion sort, analyze the
running time of the selection sort algorithm from Exercise 2.2-2.
3.1-3
Suppose that α  is a fraction in the range 0 < α  < 1. Show how to generalize
the lower -bound ar gument for insertion sort to consider an input in which
the αn  lar gest values start in the first αn  positions. What additional
restriction do you need to put on α ? What value of α  maximizes the number
Page number: 83
of times that the αn  lar gest values must pass through each of the middle (1 –
2 α ) n  array positions?
3.2      Asymptotic notation: formal definitions
Having seen asymptotic notation informally , let’ s get more formal. The
notations we use to describe the asymptotic running time of an algorithm
are defined in terms of functions whose domains are typically the set N  of
natural numbers or the set R  of real numbers. Such notations are convenient
for describing a running-time function T  ( n ). This section defines the basic
asymptotic notations and also introduces some common “proper” notational
abuses.
Figur e 3.2  Graphic examples of the O , Ω, and Θ notations. In each part, the value of n 0  shown is the
minimum possible value, but any greater value also works. (a)  O -notation gives an upper bound for a
function to within a constant factor . W e write f  ( n ) = O ( g ( n )) if there are positive constants n 0  and c
such that at and to the right of n 0 , the value of f  ( n ) always lies on or below cg ( n ). (b)  Ω-notation
gives a lower bound for a function to within a constant factor . W e write f  ( n ) = Ω( g ( n )) if there are
positive constants n 0  and c  such that at and to the right of n 0 , the value of f  ( n ) always lies on or
above cg ( n ). (c)  Θ-notation bounds a function to within constant factors. W e write f  ( n ) = Θ( g ( n )) if
there exist positive constants n 0 , c 1 , and c 2  such that at and to the right of n 0 , the value of f  ( n )
always lies between c 1 g ( n ) and c 2 g ( n ) inclusive.
O -notation
As we saw in Section 3.1 , O -notation describes an asymptotic upper bound .
W e use O -notation to give an upper bound on a function, to within a
constant factor .
Page number: 84
Here is the formal definition of O -notation. For a given function g ( n ),
we denote by O ( g ( n )) (pronounced “big-oh of g  of n ” or sometimes just “oh
of g  of n ”) the set of functions
O ( g ( n )) = { f
( n ) : there exist positive constants c  and n 0  such that 0 ≤ f  ( n ) ≤ cg ( n )
for all n  ≥ n 0 }.1
A function f  ( n ) belongs to the set O ( g ( n )) if there exists a positive constant
c  such that f  ( n ) ≤ cg ( n ) for suf ficiently lar ge n . Figure 3.2(a)  shows the
intuition behind O -notation. For all values n  at and to the right of n0 , the
value of the function f  ( n ) is on or below cg ( n ).
The definition of O ( g ( n )) requires that every function f  ( n ) in the set
O ( g ( n )) be asymptotically nonnegative : f  ( n ) must be nonnegative
whenever n  is suf ficiently lar ge. (An asymptotically positive  function is one
that is positive for all suf ficiently lar ge n .) Consequently , the function g ( n )
itself must be asymptotically nonnegative, or else the set O ( g ( n )) is empty .
W e therefore assume that every function used within O -notation is
asymptotically nonnegative. This assumption holds for the other asymptotic
notations defined in this chapter as well.
Y ou might be surprised that we define O -notation in terms of sets.
Indeed, you might expect that we would write “ f  ( n ) ∈  O ( g ( n ))” to indicate
that f  ( n ) belongs to the set O ( g ( n )). Instead, we usually write “ f  ( n ) =
O ( g ( n ))” and say “ f  ( n ) is big-oh of g ( n )” to express the same notion.
Although it may seem confusing at first to abuse equality in this way , we’ll
see later in this section that doing so has its advantages.
Let’ s explore an example of how to use the formal definition of O -
notation to justify our practice of discarding lower -order terms and ignoring
the constant coef ficient of the highest-order term. W e’ll show that 4 n2 +
100 n  + 500 = O ( n2), even though the lower -order terms have much lar ger
coef ficients than the leading term. W e need to find positive constants c  and
n0  such that 4 n2 + 100 n  + 500 ≤ cn2 for all n  ≥ n0 . Dividing both sides by n2
gives 4 + 100/ n  + 500/ n2 ≤ c . This inequality is satisfied for many choices
of c  and n0 . For example, if we choose n0  = 1, then this inequality holds for
c  = 604. If we choose n0  = 10, then c  = 19 works, and choosing n0  = 100
allows us to use c  = 5.05.
W e can also use the formal definition of O -notation to show that the
function n3 – 100 n2 does not belong to the set O ( n2), even though the
Page number: 85
coef ficient of n2 is a lar ge negative number . If we had n3 – 100 n2 = O ( n2),
then there would be positive constants c  and n0  such that n3 –100 n2 ≤ cn2
for all n  ≥ n0 . Again, we divide both sides by n2, giving n  – 100 ≤ c .
Regardless of what value we choose for the constant c , this inequality does
not hold for any value of n  > c  + 100.
Ω-notation
Just as O -notation provides an asymptotic upper  bound on a function, Ω-
notation provides an asymptotic lower bound . For a given function g ( n ), we
denote by Ω( g ( n )) (pronounced “big-omega of g  of n ” or sometimes just
“omega of g  of n ”) the set of functions
Ω( g ( n )) = { f
( n ) : there exist positive constants c  and n 0  such that 0 ≤ cg ( n ) ≤ f  ( n )
for all n  ≥ n 0 }.
Figure 3.2(b)  shows the intuition behind Ω-notation. For all values n  at or to
the right of n0 , the value of f  ( n ) is on or above cg ( n ).
W e’ve already shown that 4 n2 + 100 n  + 500 = O ( n2). Now let’ s show
that 4 n2 + 100 n  + 500 = Ω( n2). W e need to find positive constants c  and n0
such that 4 n2 + 100 n  + 500 ≥ cn2 for all n  ≥ n0 . As before, we divide both
sides by n2, giving 4 + 100/ n  + 500/ n2 ≥ c . This inequality holds when n0  is
any positive integer and c  = 4.
What if we had subtracted the lower -order terms from the 4 n2 term
instead of adding them? What if we had a small coef ficient for the n2 term?
The function would still be Ω( n2). For example, let’ s show that n2/100 –
100 n  – 500 = Ω( n2). Dividing by n2 gives 1/100 – 100/ n  – 500/ n2 ≥ c . W e
can choose any value for n0  that is at least 10,005 and find a positive value
for c . For example, when n0  = 10,005, we can choose c  = 2.49 × 10–9. Y es,
that’ s a tiny value for c , but it is positive. If we select a lar ger value for n0 ,
we can also increase c . For example, if n0  = 100,000, then we can choose c
= 0.0089. The higher the value of n0 , the closer to the coef ficient 1/100 we
can choose c .
Θ-notation
Page number: 86
W e use Θ-notation for asymptotically tight bounds . For a given function
g ( n ), we denote by Θ( g ( n )) (“theta of g  of n ”) the set of functions
Θ( g ( n )) =
{ f  ( n ) : there exist positive constants c 1 , c 2 , and n 0  such that 0 ≤ c 1 g ( n ) ≤ f
( n ) ≤ c 2 g ( n ) for all n  ≥ n 0 }.
Figure 3.2(c)  shows the intuition behind Θ-notation. For all values of n  at
and to the right of n0 , the value of f  ( n ) lies at or above c1 g ( n ) and at or
below c2 g ( n ). In other words, for all n  ≥ n0 , the function f  ( n ) is equal to
g ( n ) to within constant factors.
The definitions of O -, Ω-, and Θ-notations lead to the following
theorem, whose proof we leave as Exercise 3.2-4.
Theorem 3.1
For any two functions f  ( n ) and g ( n ), we have f  ( n ) = Θ( g ( n )) if and only if f
( n ) = O ( g ( n )) and f  ( n ) = Ω( g ( n )).
▪
W e typically apply Theorem 3.1 to prove asymptotically tight bounds from
asymptotic upper and lower bounds.
Asymptotic notation and running times
When you use asymptotic notation to characterize an algorithm’ s running
time, make sure that the asymptotic notation you use is as precise as
possible without overstating which running time it applies to. Here are
some examples of using asymptotic notation properly and improperly to
characterize running times.
Let’ s start with insertion sort. W e can correctly say that insertion sort’ s
worst-case running time is O ( n2), Ω( n2), and—due to Theorem 3.1—Θ( n2).
Although all three ways to characterize the worst-case running times are
correct, the Θ( n2) bound is the most precise and hence the most preferred.
W e can also correctly say that insertion sort’ s best-case running time is
O ( n ), Ω( n ), and Θ( n ), again with Θ( n ) the most precise and therefore the
most preferred.
Here is what we cannot  correctly say: insertion sort’ s running time is
Θ( n2). That is an overstatement because by omitting “worst-case” from the
statement, we’re left with a blanket statement covering all cases. The error
here is that insertion sort does not run in Θ( n2) time in all cases since, as
Page number: 87
we’ve seen, it runs in Θ( n ) time in the best case. W e can correctly say that
insertion sort’ s running time is O ( n2), however , because in all cases, its
running time grows no faster than n2. When we say O ( n2) instead of Θ( n2),
there is no problem in having cases whose running time grows more slowly
than n2. Likewise, we cannot correctly say that insertion sort’ s running time
is Θ( n ), but we can say that its running time is Ω( n ).
How about mer ge sort? Since mer ge sort runs in Θ( n  lg n ) time in all
cases, we can just say that its running time is Θ( n  lg n ) without specifying
worst-case, best-case, or any other case.
People occasionally conflate O -notation with Θ-notation by mistakenly
using O -notation to indicate an asymptotically tight bound. They say things
like “an O ( n  lg n )-time algorithm runs faster than an O ( n2)-time algorithm.”
Maybe it does, maybe it doesn’ t. Since O -notation denotes only an
asymptotic upper bound, that so-called O ( n2)-time algorithm might actually
run in Θ( n ) time. Y ou should be careful to choose the appropriate
asymptotic notation. If you want to indicate an asymptotically tight bound,
use Θ-notation.
W e typically use asymptotic notation to provide the simplest and most
precise bounds possible. For example, if an algorithm has a running time of
3 n2 + 20 n  in all cases, we use asymptotic notation to write that its running
time is Θ( n2). Strictly speaking, we are also correct in writing that the
running time is O ( n3) or Θ(3 n2 + 20 n ). Neither of these expressions is as
useful as writing Θ( n2) in this case, however: O ( n3) is less precise than
Θ( n2) if the running time is 3 n2 + 20 n , and Θ(3 n2 + 20 n ) introduces
complexity that obscures the order of growth. By writing the simplest and
most precise bound, such as Θ( n2), we can categorize and compare dif ferent
algorithms. Throughout the book, you will see asymptotic running times
that are almost always based on polynomials and logarithms: functions such
as n , n  lg2 n , n2 lg n , or n1/2. Y ou will also see some other functions, such as
exponentials, lg lg n , and lg*n  (see Section 3.3 ). It is usually fairly easy to
compare the rates of growth of these functions. Problem 3-3 gives you good
practice.
Asymptotic notation in equations and inequalities
Although we formally define asymptotic notation in terms of sets, we use
the equal sign (=) instead of the set membership sign ( ∈ ) within formulas.
Page number: 88
For example, we wrote that 4 n2 + 100 n  + 500 = O ( n2). W e might also write
2 n2 + 3 n  + 1 = 2 n2 + Θ( n ). How do we interpret such formulas?
When the asymptotic notation stands alone (that is, not within a lar ger
formula) on the right-hand side of an equation (or inequality), as in 4 n2 +
100 n  + 500 = O ( n2), the equal sign means set membership: 4 n2 + 100 n  +
500 ∈  O ( n2). In general, however , when asymptotic notation appears in a
formula, we interpret it as standing for some anonymous function that we
do not care to name. For example, the formula 2 n2 + 3 n  + 1 = 2 n2 + Θ( n )
means that 2 n2 + 3 n  + 1 = 2 n2 + f  ( n ), where f  ( n ) ∈  Θ( n ). In this case, we
let f  ( n ) = 3 n  + 1, which indeed belongs to Θ( n ).
Using asymptotic notation in this manner can help eliminate inessential
detail and clutter in an equation. For example, in Chapter 2  we expressed
the worst-case running time of mer ge sort as the recurrence
T  ( n ) = 2 T  ( n /2) + Θ( n ).
If we are interested only in the asymptotic behavior of T  ( n ), there is no
point in specifying all the lower -order terms exactly , because they are all
understood to be included in the anonymous function denoted by the term
Θ( n ).
The number of anonymous functions in an expression is understood to
be equal to the number of times the asymptotic notation appears. For
example, in the expression
there is only a single anonymous function (a function of i ). This expression
is thus not  the same as O (1) + O (2) + ⋯  + O ( n ), which doesn’ t really have
a clean interpretation.
In some cases, asymptotic notation appears on the left-hand side of an
equation, as in
2 n2 + Θ( n ) = Θ( n2).
Interpret such equations using the following rule: No matter how the
anonymous functions ar e chosen on the left of the equal sign, ther e is a way
to choose the anonymous functions on the right of the equal sign to make
the equation valid . Thus, our example means that for any  function f  ( n ) ∈
Page number: 89
Θ( n ), there is some  function g ( n ) ∈  Θ( n2) such that 2 n2 + f  ( n ) = g ( n ) for all
n . In other words, the right-hand side of an equation provides a coarser level
of detail than the left-hand side.
W e can chain together a number of such relationships, as in
2 n2 + 3 n  + 1  = 2 n2 + Θ( n )
 = Θ( n2).
By the rules above, interpret each equation separately . The first equation
says that there is some  function f  ( n ) ∈  Θ( n ) such that 2 n2 + 3 n  + 1 = 2 n2 +
f  ( n ) for all n . The second equation says that for any  function g ( n ) ∈  Θ( n )
(such as the f  ( n ) just mentioned), there is some  function h ( n ) ∈  Θ( n2) such
that 2 n2 + g ( n ) = h ( n ) for all n . This interpretation implies that 2 n2 + 3 n  + 1
= Θ( n2), which is what the chaining of equations intuitively says.
Pr oper abuses of asymptotic notation
Besides the abuse of equality to mean set membership, which we now see
has a precise mathematical interpretation, another abuse of asymptotic
notation occurs when the variable tending toward ∞ must be inferred from
context. For example, when we say O ( g ( n )), we can assume that we’re
interested in the growth of g ( n ) as n  grows, and if we say O ( g ( m )) we’re
talking about the growth of g ( m ) as m  grows. The free variable in the
expression indicates what variable is going to ∞.
The most common situation requiring contextual knowledge of which
variable tends to ∞ occurs when the function inside the asymptotic notation
is a constant, as in the expression O (1). W e cannot infer from the expression
which variable is going to ∞, because no variable appears there. The context
must disambiguate. For example, if the equation using asymptotic notation
is f  ( n ) = O (1), it’ s apparent that the variable we’re interested in is n .
Knowing from context that the variable of interest is n , however , allows us
to make perfect sense of the expression by using the formal definition of O -
notation: the expression f  ( n ) = O (1) means that the function f  ( n ) is
bounded from above by a constant as n  goes to ∞. T echnically , it might be
less ambiguous if we explicitly indicated the variable tending to ∞ in the
asymptotic notation itself, but that would clutter the notation. Instead, we
simply ensure that the context makes it clear which variable (or variables)
tend to ∞.
Page number: 90
When the function inside the asymptotic notation is bounded by a
positive constant, as in T  ( n ) = O (1), we often abuse asymptotic notation in
yet another way , especially when stating recurrences. W e may write
something like T  ( n ) = O (1) for n  < 3. According to the formal definition of
O -notation, this statement is meaningless, because the definition only says
that T  ( n ) is bounded above by a positive constant c  for n  ≥ n0  for some n0  >
0. The value of T  ( n ) for n  < n0  need not be so bounded. Thus, in the
example T  ( n ) = O (1) for n  < 3, we cannot infer any constraint on T  ( n )
when n  < 3, because it might be that n0  > 3.
What is conventionally meant when we say T  ( n ) = O (1) for n  < 3 is that
there exists a positive constant c  such that T  ( n ) ≤ c  for n  < 3. This
convention saves us the trouble of naming the bounding constant, allowing
it to remain anonymous while we focus on more important variables in an
analysis. Similar abuses occur with the other asymptotic notations. For
example, T  ( n ) = Θ(1) for n  < 3 means that T  ( n ) is bounded above and
below by positive constants when n  < 3.
Occasionally , the function describing an algorithm’ s running time may
not be defined for certain input sizes, for example, when an algorithm
assumes that the input size is an exact power of 2. W e still use asymptotic
notation to describe the growth of the running time, understanding that any
constraints apply only when the function is defined. For example, suppose
that f  ( n ) is defined only on a subset of the natural or nonnegative real
numbers. Then f  ( n ) = O ( g ( n )) means that the bound 0 ≤ T  ( n ) ≤ cg ( n ) in the
definition of O -notation holds for all n  ≥ n0  over the domain of f  ( n ), that is,
where f  ( n ) is defined. This abuse is rarely pointed out, since what is meant
is generally clear from context.
In mathematics, it’ s okay — and often desirable — to abuse a notation,
as long as we don’ t misuse it. If we understand precisely what is meant by
the abuse and don’ t draw incorrect conclusions, it can simplify our
mathematical language, contribute to our higher -level understanding, and
help us focus on what really matters.
o -notation
The asymptotic upper bound provided by O -notation may or may not be
asymptotically tight. The bound 2 n2 = O ( n2) is asymptotically tight, but the
bound 2 n  = O ( n2) is not. W e use o -notation to denote an upper bound that is
Page number: 91
not asymptotically tight. W e formally define o ( g ( n )) (“little-oh of g  of n ”)
as the set
o ( g ( n )) = { f
( n ) : for any positive constant c  > 0, there exists a constant n 0  > 0 such that 0 ≤ f  ( n ) <
cg ( n ) for all n  ≥ n 0 }.
For example, 2 n  = o ( n2), but 2 n2 ≠ o ( n2).
The definitions of O -notation and o -notation are similar . The main
dif ference is that in f  ( n ) = O ( g ( n )), the bound 0 ≤ f  ( n ) ≤ cg ( n ) holds for
some  constant c  > 0, but in f  ( n ) = o ( g ( n )), the bound 0 ≤ f  ( n ) < cg ( n ) holds
for all  constants c  > 0. Intuitively , in o -notation, the function f  ( n ) becomes
insignificant relative to g ( n ) as n  gets lar ge:
Some authors use this limit as a definition of the o -notation, but the
definition in this book also restricts the anonymous functions to be
asymptotically nonnegative.
ω -notation
By analogy , ω -notation is to Ω-notation as o -notation is to O -notation. W e
use ω -notation to denote a lower bound that is not asymptotically tight. One
way to define it is by
f  ( n ) ∈  ω ( g ( n )) if and only if g ( n ) ∈  o ( f  ( n )).
Formally , however , we define ω ( g ( n )) (“little-omega of g  of n ”) as the set
ω ( g ( n )) = { f
( n ) : for any positive constant c  > 0, there exists a constant n 0  > 0 such that 0 ≤ cg ( n ) < f
( n ) for all n  ≥ n 0 }.
Where the definition of o -notation says that f  ( n ) < cg ( n ), the definition of
ω -notation says the opposite: that cg ( n ) < f  ( n ). For examples of ω -notation,
we have n2/2 = ω ( n ), but n2/2 ≠ ω ( n2). The relation f  ( n ) = ω ( g ( n )) implies
that
if the limit exists. That is, f  ( n ) becomes arbitrarily lar ge relative to g ( n ) as n
gets lar ge.
Page number: 92
Comparing functions
Many of the relational properties of real numbers apply to asymptotic
comparisons as well. For the following, assume that f  ( n ) and g ( n ) are
asymptotically positive.
T ransitivity:
f  ( n ) = Θ( g ( n )) and g ( n ) = Θ( h ( n )) imply f  ( n ) = Θ( h ( n )),
f  ( n ) = O ( g ( n )) and g ( n ) = O ( h ( n )) imply f  ( n ) = O ( h ( n )),
f  ( n ) = Ω( g ( n )) and g ( n ) = Ω( h ( n )) imply f  ( n ) = Ω( h ( n )),
f  ( n ) = o ( g ( n )) and g ( n ) = o ( h ( n )) imply f  ( n ) = o ( h ( n )),
f  ( n ) = ω ( g ( n )) and g ( n ) = ω ( h ( n )) imply f  ( n ) = ω ( h ( n )).
Reflexivity:
f  ( n ) = Θ( f  ( n )),
f  ( n ) = O ( f  ( n )),
f  ( n ) = Ω( f  ( n )).
Symmetry:
f  ( n ) = Θ( g ( n )) if and only if g ( n ) = Θ( f  ( n )).
T ranspose symmetry:
f  ( n ) = O ( g ( n )) if and only if g ( n ) = Ω( f  ( n )),
f  ( n ) = o ( g ( n )) if and only if g ( n ) = ω ( f  ( n )).
Because these properties hold for asymptotic notations, we can draw an
analogy between the asymptotic comparison of two functions f  and g  and
the comparison of two real numbers a  and b :
f  ( n ) = O ( g ( n )) is like a  ≤ b ,
f  ( n ) = Ω( g ( n )) is like a  ≥ b ,
f  ( n ) = Θ( g ( n )) is like a  = b ,
f  ( n ) = o ( g ( n )) is like a  < b ,
f  ( n ) = ω ( g ( n )) is like a  > b .
W e say that f  ( n ) is asymptotically smaller  than g ( n ) if f  ( n ) = o ( g ( n )), and f
( n ) is asymptotically larger  than g ( n ) if f  ( n ) = ω ( g ( n )).
One property of real numbers, however , does not carry over to
asymptotic notation:
Page number: 93
T richotomy:  For any two real numbers a  and b , exactly one of the
following must hold: a  < b , a  = b , or a  > b .
Although any two real numbers can be compared, not all functions are
asymptotically comparable. That is, for two functions f  ( n ) and g ( n ), it may
be the case that neither f  ( n ) = O ( g ( n )) nor f  ( n ) = Ω( g ( n )) holds. For
example, we cannot compare the functions n  and n1 + sin n using asymptotic
notation, since the value of the exponent in n1 + sin n oscillates between 0
and 2, taking on all values in between.
Exer cises
3.2-1
Let f  ( n ) and g ( n ) be asymptotically nonnegative functions. Using the basic
definition of Θ-notation, prove that max { f  ( n ), g ( n )} = Θ( f  ( n ) + g ( n )).
3.2-2
Explain why the statement, “The running time of algorithm A  is at least
O ( n2),” is meaningless.
3.2-3
Is 2n  + 1 = O (2n)? Is 22 n = O (2n)?
3.2-4
Prove Theorem 3.1.
3.2-5
Prove that the running time of an algorithm is Θ( g ( n )) if and only if its
worst-case running time is O ( g ( n )) and its best-case running time is
Ω( g ( n )).
3.2-6
Prove that o ( g ( n )) ∩ ω ( g ( n )) is the empty set.
3.2-7
W e can extend our notation to the case of two parameters n  and m  that can
go to ∞ independently at dif ferent rates. For a given function g ( n , m ), we
denote by O ( g ( n , m )) the set of functions
O ( g ( n , m )) =
{ f  ( n , m ) : there exist positive constants c , n 0 , and m 0  such that 0 ≤ f  ( n , m )
Page number: 94
≤ cg ( n , m ) for all n  ≥ n 0  or m  ≥ m 0 }.
Give corresponding definitions for Ω( g ( n , m )) and Θ( g ( n , m )).
3.3      Standard notations and common functions
This section reviews some standard mathematical functions and notations
and explores the relationships among them. It also illustrates the use of the
asymptotic notations.
Monotonicity
A function f  ( n ) is monotonically increasing  if m  ≤ n  implies f  ( m ) ≤ f  ( n ).
Similarly , it is monotonically decreasing  if m  ≤ n  implies f  ( m ) ≥ f  ( n ). A
function f  ( n ) is strictly increasing  if m  < n  implies f  ( m ) < f  ( n ) and strictly
decreasing  if m  < n  implies f  ( m ) > f  ( n ).
Floors and ceilings
For any real number x , we denote the greatest integer less than or equal to x
by ⌊ x ⌋  (read “the floor of x ”) and the least integer greater than or equal to x
by ⌈ x ⌉  (read “the ceiling of x ”). The floor function is monotonically
increasing, as is the ceiling function.
Floors and ceilings obey the following properties. For any integer n , we
have
For all real x , we have
W e also have
or equivalently ,
For any real number x  ≥ 0 and integers a , b  > 0, we have
Page number: 95
For any integer n  and real number x , we have
Modular arithmetic
For any integer a  and any positive integer n , the value a  mod n  is the
remainder  (or residue ) of the quotient a / n :
It follows that
even when a  is negative.
Given a well-defined notion of the remainder of one integer when
divided by another , it is convenient to provide special notation to indicate
equality of remainders. If ( a  mod n ) = ( b  mod n ), we write a  = b  (mod n )
and say that a  is equivalent  to b , modulo n . In other words, a  = b  (mod n ) if
a  and b  have the same remainder when divided by n . Equivalently , a  = b
(mod n ) if and only if n  is a divisor of b  – a . W e write a  ≠ b  (mod n ) if a  is
not equivalent to b , modulo n .
Polynomials
Given a nonnegative integer d , a polynomial in n of degree d  is a function
p ( n ) of the form
Page number: 96
where the constants a0 , a1 , … , ad  are the coef ficients  of the polynomial and
ad  ≠ 0. A polynomial is asymptotically positive if and only if ad  > 0. For an
asymptotically positive polynomial p ( n ) of degree d , we have p ( n ) = Θ( nd).
For any real constant a  ≥ 0, the function na is monotonically increasing, and
for any real constant a  ≤ 0, the function na is monotonically decreasing. W e
say that a function f  ( n ) is polynomially bounded  if f  ( n ) = O ( nk) for some
constant k .
Exponentials
For all real a  > 0, m , and n , we have the following identities:
a0 = 1,
a1 = a ,
a–1 = 1/ a ,
( am)n =amn,
( am)n =( an)m,
aman =am + n.
For all n  and a  ≥ 1, the function an is monotonically increasing in n . When
convenient, we assume that 00 = 1.
W e can relate the rates of growth of polynomials and exponentials by the
following fact. For all real constants a  > 1 and b , we have
from which we can conclude that
Thus, any exponential function with a base strictly greater than 1 grows
faster than any polynomial function.
Using e  to denote 2.71828 …, the base of the natural-logarithm function,
we have for all real x ,
Page number: 97
where “!” denotes the factorial function defined later in this section. For all
real x , we have the inequality
where equality holds only when x  = 0. When | x | ≤ 1, we have the
approximation
When x  → 0, the approximation of ex by 1 + x  is quite good:
ex = 1 + x  + Θ( x2).
(In this equation, the asymptotic notation is used to describe the limiting
behavior as x  → 0 rather than as x  → ∞.) W e have for all x ,
Logarithms
W e use the following notations:
lg n = log 2  n (binary logarithm),
ln n = log e  n (natural logarithm),
lgk n = (lg n )k (exponentiation),
lg lg n = lg(lg n ) (composition).
W e adopt the following notational convention: in the absence of
parentheses, a logarithm function applies only to the next term in the
formula , so that lg n  + 1 means (lg n ) + 1 and not lg( n  + 1).
For any constant b  > 1, the function logb  n  is undefined if n  ≤ 0, strictly
increasing if n  > 0, negative if 0 < n  < 1, positive if n  > 1, and 0 if n  = 1. For
all real a  > 0, b  > 0, c  > 0, and n , we have
Page number: 98
where, in each equation above, logarithm bases are not 1.
By equation (3.19), changing the base of a logarithm from one constant
to another changes the value of the logarithm by only a constant factor .
Consequently , we often use the notation “lg n ” when we don’ t care about
constant factors, such as in O -notation. Computer scientists find 2 to be the
most natural base for logarithms because so many algorithms and data
structures involve splitting a problem into two parts.
There is a simple series expansion for ln(1 + x ) when | x | < 1:
W e also have the following inequalities for x  > – 1:
where equality holds only for x  = 0.
W e say that a function f  ( n ) is polylogarithmically bounded  if f  ( n ) =
O (lgk n ) for some constant k . W e can relate the growth of polynomials and
polylogarithms by substituting lg n  for n  and 2a for a  in equation (3.13). For
all real constants a  > 0 and b , we have
Thus, any positive polynomial function grows faster than any
polylogarithmic function.
Factorials
Page number: 99
The notation n ! (read “ n  factorial”) is defined for integers n  ≥ 0 as
Thus, n ! = 1 · 2 · 3 ⋯  n .
A weak upper bound on the factorial function is n ! ≤ nn, since each of
the n  terms in the factorial product is at most n . Stirling’ s approximation ,
where e  is the base of the natural logarithm, gives us a tighter upper bound,
and a lower bound as well. Exercise 3.3-4 asks you to prove the three facts
where Stirling’ s approximation is helpful in proving equation (3.28). The
following equation also holds for all n  ≥ 1:
where
Functional iteration
W e use the notation f( i ) ( n ) to denote the function f  ( n ) iteratively applied i
times to an initial value of n . Formally , let f  ( n ) be a function over the reals.
For nonnegative integers i , we recursively define
For example, if f  ( n ) = 2 n , then f( i ) ( n ) = 2in .
The iterated logarithm function
Page number: 100
W e use the notation lg*n  (read “log star of n ”) to denote the iterated
logarithm, defined as follows. Let lg( i ) n  be as defined above, with f  ( n ) = lg
n . Because the logarithm of a nonpositive number is undefined, lg(i) n  is
defined only if lg( i –1) n  > 0. Be sure to distinguish lg( i ) n  (the logarithm
function applied i  times in succession, starting with ar gument n ) from lgi n
(the logarithm of n  raised to the i th power). Then we define the iterated
logarithm function as
lg*n  = min { i  ≥ 0 : lg( i ) n  ≤ 1}.
The iterated logarithm is a very  slowly growing function:
lg* 2= 1,
lg* 4= 2,
lg* 16= 3,
lg* 65536= 4,
lg* (265536)= 5.
Since the number of atoms in the observable universe is estimated to be
about 1080, which is much less than 265536 = 1065536/lg 10 ≈ 1019,728, we
rarely encounter an input size n  for which lg* n  > 5.
Fibonacci numbers
W e define the Fibonacci numbers  Fi , for i  ≥ 0, as follows:
Thus, after the first two, each Fibonacci number is the sum of the two
previous ones, yielding the sequence
0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55, ….
Fibonacci numbers are related to the golden ratio  ϕ  and its conjugate 
 ,
which are the two roots of the equation
x2 = x  + 1.
Page number: 101
As Exercise 3.3-7 asks you to prove, the golden ratio is given by
and its conjugate, by
Specifically , we have
which can be proved by induction (Exercise 3.3-8). Since 
 , we have
which implies that
which is to say that the i th Fibonacci number Fi  is equal to 
  rounded
to the nearest integer . Thus, Fibonacci numbers grow exponentially .
Exer cises
3.3-1
Show that if f  ( n ) and g ( n ) are monotonically increasing functions, then so
are the functions f  ( n ) + g ( n ) and f  ( g ( n )), and if f  ( n ) and g ( n ) are in addition
nonnegative, then f  ( n ) · g ( n ) is monotonically increasing.
3.3-2
Prove that ⌊ αn ⌋  + ⌈ (1 – α ) n ⌉  = n  for any integer n  and real number α  in the
range 0 ≤ α  ≤ 1.
Page number: 102
3.3-3
Use equation (3.14) or other means to show that ( n  + o ( n ))k = Θ( nk) for any
real constant k . Conclude that ⌈ n ⌉k = Θ( nk) and ⌊ n ⌋k = Θ( nk).
3.3-4
Prove the following:
a.  Equation (3.21).
b.  Equations (3.26)–(3.28).
c.  lg(Θ( n )) = Θ(lg n ).
★  3.3-5
Is the function ⌈ lg n ⌉ ! polynomially bounded? Is the function ⌈ lg lg n ⌉ !
polynomially bounded?
★  3.3-6
Which is asymptotically lar ger: lg(lg* n ) or lg*(lg n )?
3.3-7
Show that the golden ratio ϕ  and its conjugate 
  both satisfy the equation x2
= x  + 1.
3.3-8
Prove by induction that the i th Fibonacci number satisfies the equation
where ϕ  is the golden ratio and 
  is its conjugate.
3.3-9
Show that k  lg k  = Θ( n ) implies k  = Θ( n /lg n ).
Pr oblems
3-1     Asymptotic behavior of polynomials
Let
Page number: 103
where ad  > 0, be a degree- d  polynomial in n , and let k  be a constant. Use the
definitions of the asymptotic notations to prove the following properties.
a.  If k  ≥ d , then p ( n ) = O ( nk).
b.  If k  ≤ d , then p ( n ) = Ω( nk).
c.  If k  = d , then p ( n ) = Θ( nk).
d.  If k  > d , then p ( n ) = o ( nk).
e.  If k  < d , then p ( n ) = ω ( nk).
3-2     Relative asymptotic growths
Indicate, for each pair of expressions ( A , B ) in the table below whether A  is
O , o , Ω, ω , or Θ of B . Assume that k  ≥ 1, ϵ  > 0, and c  > 1 are constants.
W rite your answer in the form of the table with “yes” or “no” written in
each box.
3-3     Ordering by asymptotic growth rates
a.  Rank the following functions by order of growth. That is, find an
arrangement g1 , g2 , … , g30  of the functions satisfying g1  = Ω( g2 ), g2  =
Ω( g3 ), … , g29  = Ω( g30 ). Partition your list into equivalence classes such
that functions f  ( n ) and g ( n ) belong to the same class if and only if f  ( n ) =
Θ( g ( n )).
lg(lg* n ) 2lg* n
n2 n ! (lg n )!
Page number: 104
(3/2)nn3lg2 nlg( n !)
n1/lg n
ln ln nlg* n n  · 2nnlg lg n ln n 1
2lg n(lg n )lg nen4lg n ( n  + 1)!
lg*(lg n )
n2n n  lg n
b.  Give an example of a single nonnegative function f  ( n ) such that for all
functions gi ( n ) in part (a), f  ( n ) is neither O ( gi ( n )) nor Ω( gi ( n )).
3-4     Asymptotic notation properties
Let f  ( n ) and g ( n ) be asymptotically positive functions. Prove or disprove
each of the following conjectures.
a.  f  ( n ) = O ( g ( n )) implies g ( n ) = O ( f  ( n )).
b.  f  ( n ) + g ( n ) = Θ(min { f  ( n ), g ( n )}).
c.  f  ( n ) = O ( g ( n )) implies lg f  ( n ) = O (lg g ( n )), where lg g ( n ) ≥ 1 and f  ( n ) ≥
1 for all suf ficiently lar ge n .
d.  f  ( n ) = O ( g ( n )) implies 2f ( n ) = O  (2g ( n )).
e.  f  ( n ) = O  (( f  ( n ))2).
f.  f  ( n ) = O ( g ( n )) implies g ( n ) = Ω( f  ( n )).
g.  f  ( n ) = Θ( f  ( n /2)).
h.  f  ( n ) + o ( f  ( n )) = Θ( f  ( n )).
3-5     Manipulating asymptotic notation
Let f  ( n ) and g ( n ) be asymptotically positive functions. Prove the following
identities:
a.  Θ(Θ( f  ( n ))) = Θ( f  ( n )).
b.  Θ( f  ( n )) + O ( f  ( n )) = Θ( f  ( n )).
c.  Θ( f  ( n )) + Θ( g ( n )) = Θ( f  ( n ) + g ( n )).
d.  Θ( f  ( n )) · Θ( g ( n )) = Θ( f  ( n ) · g ( n )).
Page number: 105
e.  Ar gue that for any real constants a1 , b1  > 0 and integer constants k1 , k2 ,
the following asymptotic bound holds:
★  f.  Prove that for S  ⊆  Z , we have
assuming that both sums conver ge.
★  g.  Show that for S  ⊆  Z , the following asymptotic bound does not
necessarily hold, even assuming that both products conver ge, by giving
a counterexample:
3-6     V ariations on O and Ω
Some authors define Ω-notation in a slightly dif ferent way than this
textbook does. W e’ll use the nomenclature 
  (read “omega infinity”) for
this alternative definition. W e say that 
  if there exists a
positive constant c  such that f  ( n ) ≥ cg ( n ) ≥ 0 for infinitely many integers n .
a.  Show that for any two asymptotically nonnegative functions f  ( n ) and
g ( n ), we have f  ( n ) = O ( g ( n )) or 
  (or both).
b.  Show that there exist two asymptotically nonnegative functions f  ( n ) and
g ( n ) for which neither f  ( n ) = O ( g ( n )) nor f  ( n ) = Ω( g ( n )) holds.
c.  Describe the potential advantages and disadvantages of using 
 -notation
instead of Ω-notation to characterize the running times of programs.
Some authors also define O  in a slightly dif ferent manner . W e’ll use O′ for
the alternative definition: f  ( n ) = O′( g ( n )) if and only if | f  ( n )| = O ( g ( n )).
d.  What happens to each direction of the “if and only if” in Theorem 3.1 on
page 56 if we substitute O′ for O  but still use Ω?
Page number: 106
Some authors define 
  (read “soft-oh”) to mean O  with logarithmic factors
ignored:
 : there exist positive constants c , k , and n 0  such that 0 ≤ f
( n ) ≤ cg ( n ) lgk( n ) for all n  ≥ n 0 }.
e.  Define 
  and 
  in a similar manner . Prove the corresponding analog to
Theorem 3.1.
3-7     Iterated functions
W e can apply the iteration operator * used in the lg* function to any
monotonically increasing function f  ( n ) over the reals. For a given constant
c  ∈  R , we define the iterated function 
  by
which need not be well defined in all cases. In other words, the quantity 
 is the minimum number of iterated applications of the function f
required to reduce its ar gument down to c  or less.
For each of the functions f  ( n ) and constants c  in the table below , give as
tight a bound as possible on 
 . If there is no i  such that f( i )( n ) ≤ c , write
“undefined” as your answer .
f  ( n ) c
a. n  – 1 0
b. lg n 1
c. n /2 1
d. n /2 2
e.
 2
f.
 1
g. n1/3 2
Chapter notes
Knuth [ 259 ] traces the origin of the O -notation to a number -theory text by
P . Bachmann in 1892. The o -notation was invented by E. Landau in 1909
for his discussion of the distribution of prime numbers. The Ω and Θ
notations were advocated by Knuth [ 265 ] to correct the popular , but
Page number: 107
technically sloppy , practice in the literature of using O -notation for both
upper and lower bounds. As noted earlier in this chapter , many people
continue to use the O -notation where the Θ-notation is more technically
precise. The soft-oh notation 
  in Problem 3-6 was introduced by Babai,
Luks, and Seress [ 31 ], although it was originally written as O ~. Some
authors now define 
  as ignoring factors that are logarithmic in g ( n ),
rather than in n . W ith this definition, we can say that 
 , but with
the definition in Problem 3-6, this statement is not true. Further discussion
of the history and development of asymptotic notations appears in works by
Knuth [ 259 , 265 ] and Brassard and Bratley [ 70 ].
Not all authors define the asymptotic notations in the same way ,
although the various definitions agree in most common situations. Some of
the alternative definitions encompass functions that are not asymptotically
nonnegative, as long as their absolute values are appropriately bounded.
Equation (3.29) is due to Robbins [ 381 ]. Other properties of elementary
mathematical functions can be found in any good mathematical reference,
such as Abramowitz and Stegun [ 1 ] or Zwillinger [ 468 ], or in a calculus
book, such as Apostol [ 19 ] or Thomas et al. [ 433 ]. Knuth [ 259 ] and
Graham, Knuth, and Patashnik [ 199 ] contain a wealth of material on
discrete mathematics as used in computer science.
1 W ithin set notation, a colon means “such that.”
Page number: 108
4          Divide-and-Conquer
The divide-and-conquer method is a powerful strategy for designing
asymptotically ef ficient algorithms. W e saw an example of divide-and-
conquer in Section 2.3.1  when learning about mer ge sort. In this chapter ,
we’ll explore applications of the divide-and-conquer method and acquire
valuable mathematical tools that you can use to solve the recurrences that
arise when analyzing divide-and-conquer algorithms.
Recall that for divide-and-conquer , you solve a given problem (instance)
recursively . If the problem is small enough—the base case —you just solve
it directly without recursing. Otherwise—the recursive case —you perform
three characteristic steps:
Divide  the problem into one or more subproblems that are smaller instances
of the same problem.
Conquer  the subproblems by solving them recursively .
Combine  the subproblem solutions to form a solution to the original
problem.
A divide-and-conquer algorithm breaks down a lar ge problem into smaller
subproblems, which themselves may be broken down into even smaller
subproblems, and so forth. The recursion bottoms out  when it reaches a
base case and the subproblem is small enough to solve directly without
further recursing.
Recurr ences
T o analyze recursive divide-and-conquer algorithms, we’ll need some
mathematical tools. A recurrence  is an equation that describes a function in
Page number: 109
terms of its value on other , typically smaller , ar guments. Recurrences go
hand in hand with the divide-and-conquer method because they give us a
natural way to characterize the running times of recursive algorithms
mathematically . Y ou saw an example of a recurrence in Section 2.3.2  when
we analyzed the worst-case running time of mer ge sort.
For the divide-and-conquer matrix-multiplication algorithms presented
in Sections 4.1  and 4.2 , we’ll derive recurrences that describe their worst-
case running times. T o understand why these two divide-and-conquer
algorithms perform the way they do, you’ll need to learn how to solve the
recurrences that describe their running times. Sections 4.3 – 4.7  teach several
methods for solving recurrences. These sections also explore the
mathematics behind recurrences, which can give you stronger intuition for
designing your own divide-and-conquer algorithms.
W e want to get to the algorithms as soon as possible. So, let’ s just cover
a few recurrence basics now , and then we’ll look more deeply at
recurrences, especially how to solve them, after we see the matrix-
multiplication examples.
The general form of a recurrence is an equation or inequality that
describes a function over the integers or reals using the function itself. It
contains two or more cases, depending on the ar gument. If a case involves
the recursive invocation of the function on dif ferent (usually smaller)
inputs, it is a recursive case . If a case does not involve a recursive
invocation, it is a base case . There may be zero, one, or many functions that
satisfy the statement of the recurrence. The recurrence is well defined  if
there is at least one function that satisfies it, and ill defined  otherwise.
Algorithmic r ecurr ences
W e’ll be particularly interested in recurrences that describe the running
times of divide-and-conquer algorithms. A recurrence T  ( n ) is algorithmic
if, for every suf ficiently lar ge threshold  constant n0  > 0, the following two
properties hold:
1. For all n  < n0 , we have T  ( n ) = Θ(1).
2. For all n  ≥ n0 , every path of recursion terminates in a defined base case
within a finite number of recursive invocations.
Page number: 110
Similar to how we sometimes abuse asymptotic notation (see page 60),
when a function is not defined for all ar guments, we understand that this
definition is constrained to values of n  for which T  ( n ) is defined.
Why would a recurrence T  ( n ) that represents a (correct) divide-and-
conquer algorithm’ s worst-case running time satisfy these properties for all
suf ficiently lar ge threshold constants? The first property says that there
exist constants c1 , c2  such that 0 < c1  ≤ T  ( n ) ≤ c2  for n  < n0 . For every legal
input, the algorithm must output the solution to the problem it’ s solving in
finite time (see Section 1.1 ). Thus we can let c1  be the minimum amount of
time to call and return from a procedure, which must be positive, because
machine instructions need to be executed to invoke a procedure. The
running time of the algorithm may not be defined for some values of n  if
there are no legal inputs of that size, but it must be defined for at least one,
or else the “algorithm” doesn’ t solve any problem. Thus we can let c2  be the
algorithm’ s maximum running time on any input of size n  < n0 , where n0  is
suf ficiently lar ge that the algorithm solves at least one problem of size less
than n0 . The maximum is well defined, since there are at most a finite
number of inputs of size less than n0 , and there is at least one if n0  is
suf ficiently lar ge. Consequently , T  ( n ) satisfies the first property . If the
second property fails to hold for T  ( n ), then the algorithm isn’ t correct,
because it would end up in an infinite recursive loop or otherwise fail to
compute a solution. Thus, it stands to reason that a recurrence for the worst-
case running time of a correct divide-and-conquer algorithm would be
algorithmic.
Conventions for r ecurr ences
W e adopt the following convention:
Whenever a r ecurr ence is stated without an explicit base case, we
assume that the r ecurr ence is algorithmic.
That means you’re free to pick any suf ficiently lar ge threshold constant n0
for the range of base cases where T  ( n ) = Θ(1). Interestingly , the asymptotic
solutions of most algorithmic recurrences you’re likely to see when
analyzing algorithms don’ t depend on the choice of threshold constant, as
long as it’ s lar ge enough to make the recurrence well defined.
Page number: 111
Asymptotic solutions of algorithmic divide-and-conquer recurrences
also don’ t tend to change when we drop any floors or ceilings in a
recurrence defined on the integers to convert it to a recurrence defined on
the reals. Section 4.7  gives a suf ficient condition for ignoring floors and
ceilings that applies to most of the divide-and-conquer recurrences you’re
likely to see. Consequently , we’ll frequently state algorithmic recurrences
without floors and ceilings. Doing so generally simplifies the statement of
the recurrences, as well as any math that we do with them.
Y ou may sometimes see recurrences that are not equations, but rather
inequalities, such as T  ( n ) ≤ 2 T  ( n /2) + Θ( n ). Because such a recurrence
states only an upper bound on T  ( n ), we express its solution using O -
notation rather than Θ-notation. Similarly , if the inequality is reversed to T
( n ) ≥ 2 T  ( n /2) + Θ( n ), then, because the recurrence gives only a lower
bound on T  ( n ), we use Ω-notation in its solution.
Divide-and-conquer and r ecurr ences
This chapter illustrates the divide-and-conquer method by presenting and
using recurrences to analyze two divide-and-conquer algorithms for
multiplying n  × n  matrices. Section 4.1  presents a simple divide-and-
conquer algorithm that solves a matrix-multiplication problem of size n  by
breaking it into four subproblems of size n /2, which it then solves
recursively . The running time of the algorithm can be characterized by the
recurrence
T  ( n ) = 8 T  ( n /2) + Θ(1),
which turns out to have the solution T  ( n ) = Θ( n3). Although this divide-
and-conquer algorithm is no faster than the straightforward method that
uses a triply nested loop, it leads to an asymptotically faster divide-and-
conquer algorithm due to V . Strassen, which we’ll explore in Section 4.2 .
Strassen’ s remarkable algorithm divides a problem of size n  into seven
subproblems of size n /2 which it solves recursively . The running time of
Strassen’ s algorithm can be described by the recurrence
T  ( n ) = 7 T  ( n /2) + Θ( n2),
which has the solution T  ( n ) = Θ( nlg 7) = O ( n2.81). Strassen’ s algorithm beats
the straightforward looping method asymptotically .
Page number: 112
These two divide-and-conquer algorithms both break a problem of size n
into several subproblems of size n /2. Although it is common when using
divide-and-conquer for all the subproblems to have the same size, that isn’ t
always the case. Sometimes it’ s productive to divide a problem of size n
into subproblems of dif ferent sizes, and then the recurrence describing the
running time reflects the irregularity . For example, consider a divide-and-
conquer algorithm that divides a problem of size n  into one subproblem of
size n /3 and another of size 2 n /3, taking Θ( n ) time to divide the problem
and combine the solutions to the subproblems. Then the algorithm’ s running
time can be described by the recurrence
T  ( n ) = T  ( n /3) + T  (2 n /3) + Θ( n ),
which turns out to have solution T  ( n ) = Θ( n  lg n ). W e’ll even see an
algorithm in Chapter 9  that solves a problem of size n  by recursively
solving a subproblem of size n /5 and another of size 7 n /10, taking Θ( n )
time for the divide and combine steps. Its performance satisfies the
recurrence
T  ( n ) = T  ( n /5) + T  (7 n /10) + Θ( n ),
which has solution T  ( n ) = Θ( n ).
Although divide-and-conquer algorithms usually create subproblems
with sizes a constant fraction of the original problem size, that’ s not always
the case. For example, a recursive version of linear search (see Exercise
2.1-4) creates just one subproblem, with one element less than the original
problem. Each recursive call takes constant time plus the time to recursively
solve a subproblem with one less element, leading to the recurrence
T  ( n ) = T  ( n  – 1) + Θ(1),
which has solution T  ( n ) = Θ( n ). Nevertheless, the vast majority of ef ficient
divide-and-conquer algorithms solve subproblems that are a constant
fraction of the size of the original problem, which is where we’ll focus our
ef forts.
Solving r ecurr ences
After learning about divide-and-conquer algorithms for matrix
multiplication in Sections 4.1  and 4.2 , we’ll explore several mathematical
tools for solving recurrences—that is, for obtaining asymptotic Θ-, O -, or
Page number: 113
Ω-bounds on their solutions. W e want simple-to-use tools that can handle
the most commonly occurring situations. But we also want general tools
that work, perhaps with a little more ef fort, for less common cases. This
chapter of fers four methods for solving recurrences:
In the substitution method  ( Section 4.3 ), you guess the form of a
bound and then use mathematical induction to prove your guess
correct and solve for constants. This method is perhaps the most
robust method for solving recurrences, but it also requires you to
make a good guess and to produce an inductive proof.
The recursion-tree method  ( Section 4.4 ) models the recurrence as a
tree whose nodes represent the costs incurred at various levels of the
recursion. T o solve the recurrence, you determine the costs at each
level and add them up, perhaps using techniques for bounding
summations from Section A.2 . Even if you don’ t use this method to
formally prove a bound, it can be helpful in guessing the form of the
bound for use in the substitution method.
The master method  ( Sections 4.5  and 4.6 ) is the easiest method,
when it applies. It provides bounds for recurrences of the form
T  ( n ) = aT  ( n / b ) + f  ( n ),
where a  > 0 and b  > 1 are constants and f  ( n ) is a given “driving”
function. This type of recurrence tends to arise more frequently in the
study of algorithms than any other . It characterizes a divide-and-
conquer algorithm that creates a  subproblems, each of which is 1/ b
times the size of the original problem, using f  ( n ) time for the divide
and combine steps. T o apply the master method, you need to
memorize three cases, but once you do, you can easily determine
asymptotic bounds on running times for many divide-and-conquer
algorithms.
The Akra-Bazzi method  ( Section 4.7 ) is a general method for solving
divide-and-conquer recurrences. Although it involves calculus, it can
be used to attack more complicated recurrences than those addressed
by the master method.
4.1      Multiplying squar e matrices
Page number: 114
W e can use the divide-and-conquer method to multiply square matrices. If
you’ve seen matrices before, then you probably know how to multiply
them. (Otherwise, you should read Section D.1 .) Let A  = ( aik ) and B  = ( bjk )
be square n  × n  matrices. The matrix product C  = A  · B  is also an n  × n
matrix, where for i , j  = 1, 2, … , n , the ( i , j ) entry of C  is given by
Generally , we’ll assume that the matrices are dense , meaning that most of
the n2 entries are not 0, as opposed to sparse , where most of the n2 entries
are 0 and the nonzero entries can be stored more compactly than in an n  × n
array .
Computing the matrix C  requires computing n2 matrix entries, each of
which is the sum of n  pairwise products of input elements from A  and B .
The M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y  procedure implements this strategy in a
straightforward manner , and it generalizes the problem slightly . It takes as
input three n  × n  matrices A , B , and C , and it adds the matrix product A  · B
to C , storing the result in C . Thus, it computes C  = C  + A  · B , instead of just
C  = A  · B . If only the product A  · B  is needed, just initialize all n2 entries of
C  to 0 before calling the procedure, which takes an additional Θ( n2) time.
W e’ll see that the cost of matrix multiplication asymptotically dominates
this initialization cost.
M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y ( A , B , C , n )
1 for  i  = 1 to  n //  compute entries in each of n  rows
2 for  j  = 1 to  n //  compute n  entries in row i
3 for  k  = 1 to  n
4 c ij  = c ij  + a ik  · b kj //  add in another term of equation (4.1)
The pseudocode for M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y  works as follows. The for  loop
of lines 1–4 computes the entries of each row i , and within a given row i ,
the for  loop of lines 2–4 computes each of the entries cij  for each column j .
Each iteration of the for  loop of lines 3–4 adds in one more term of
equation (4.1).
Because each of the triply nested for  loops runs for exactly n  iterations,
and each execution of line 4 takes constant time, the M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y
Page number: 115
procedure operates in Θ( n3) time. Even if we add in the Θ( n2) time for
initializing C  to 0, the running time is still Θ( n3).
A simple divide-and-conquer algorithm
Let’ s see how to compute the matrix product A  · B  using divide-and-
conquer . For n  > 1, the divide step partitions the n  × n  matrices into four n /2
× n /2 submatrices. W e’ll assume that n  is an exact power of 2, so that as the
algorithm recurses, we are guaranteed that the submatrix dimensions are
integer . (Exercise 4.1-1 asks you to relax this assumption.) As with M A TRIX -
M UL TIPL Y , we’ll actually compute C  = C  + A  · B . But to simplify the math
behind the algorithm, let’ s assume that C  has been initialized to the zero
matrix, so that we are indeed computing C  = A  · B .
The divide step views each of the n  × n  matrices A , B , and C  as four n /2
× n /2 submatrices:
Then we can write the matrix product as
which corresponds to the equations
Equations (4.5)–(4.8) involve eight n /2 × n /2 multiplications and four
additions of n /2 × n /2 submatrices.
As we look to transform these equations to an algorithm that can be
described with pseudocode, or even implemented for real, there are two
common approaches for implementing the matrix partitioning.
One strategy is to allocate temporary storage to hold A ’ s four
submatrices A1 1 , A12 , A21 , and A22  and B ’ s four submatrices B1 1 , B12 , B21 ,
Page number: 116
and B22 . Then copy each element in A  and B  to its corresponding location in
the appropriate submatrix. After the recursive conquer step, copy the
elements in each of C ’ s four submatrices C1 1 , C12 , C21 , and C22  to their
corresponding locations in C . This approach takes Θ( n2) time, since 3 n2
elements are copied.
The second approach uses index calculations and is faster and more
practical. A submatrix can be specified within a matrix by indicating where
within the matrix the submatrix lies without touching any matrix elements.
Partitioning a matrix (or recursively , a submatrix) only involves arithmetic
on this location information, which has constant size independent of the
size of the matrix. Changes to the submatrix elements update the original
matrix, since they occupy the same storage.
Going forward, we’ll assume that index calculations are used and that
partitioning can be performed in Θ(1) time. Exercise 4.1-3 asks you to show
that it makes no dif ference to the overall asymptotic running time of matrix
multiplication, however , whether the partitioning of matrices uses the first
method of copying or the second method of index calculation. But for other
divide-and-conquer matrix calculations, such as matrix addition, it can
make a dif ference, as Exercise 4.1-4 asks you to show .
The procedure M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y -R ECURSIVE  uses equations (4.5)–(4.8)
to implement a divide-and-conquer strategy for square-matrix
multiplication. Like M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y , the procedure M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y -
R ECURSIVE  computes C  = C  + A  · B  since, if necessary , C  can be initialized
to 0 before the procedure is called in order to compute only C  = A  · B .
M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y -R ECURSIVE ( A , B , C , n )
  1 if  n  == 1
  2 //  Base case.
  3 c 1 1  = c 1 1  + a 1 1  · b 1 1
  4 r eturn
  5 //  Divide.
  6 partition A , B , and C  into n /2 × n /2 submatrices
A 1 1 , A 12 , A 21 , A 22 ; B 1 1 , B 12 , B 21 , B 22 ;  
and C 1 1 , C 12 , C 21 , C 22 ; respectively
  7 //  Conquer .
  8 M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y -R ECURSIVE ( A 1 1 , B 1 1 , C 1 1 , n /2)
  9 M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y -R ECURSIVE ( A 1 1 , B 12 , C 12 , n /2)
10 M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y -R ECURSIVE ( A 21 , B 1 1 , C 21 , n /2)
1 1
Page number: 117
M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y -R ECURSIVE ( A 21 , B 12 , C 22 , n /2)
12 M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y -R ECURSIVE ( A 12 , B 21 , C 1 1 , n /2)
13 M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y -R ECURSIVE ( A 12 , B 22 , C 12 , n /2)
14 M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y -R ECURSIVE ( A 22 , B 21 , C 21 , n /2)
15 M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y -R ECURSIVE ( A 22 , B 22 , C 22 , n /2)
As we walk through the pseudocode, we’ll derive a recurrence to
characterize its running time. Let T  ( n ) be the worst-case time to multiply
two n  × n  matrices using this procedure.
In the base case, when n  = 1, line 3 performs just the one scalar
multiplication and one addition, which means that T  (1) = Θ(1). As is our
convention for constant base cases, we can omit this base case in the
statement of the recurrence.
The recursive case occurs when n  > 1. As discussed, we’ll use index
calculations to partition the matrices in line 6, taking Θ(1) time. Lines 8–15
recursively call M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y -R ECURSIVE  a total of eight times. The
first four recursive calls compute the first terms of equations (4.5)–(4.8),
and the subsequent four recursive calls compute and add in the second
terms. Each recursive call adds the product of a submatrix of A  and a
submatrix of B  to the appropriate submatrix of C  in place, thanks to index
calculations. Because each recursive call multiplies two n /2 × n /2 matrices,
thereby contributing T  ( n /2) to the overall running time, the time taken by
all eight recursive calls is 8 T  ( n /2). There is no combine step, because the
matrix C  is updated in place. The total time for the recursive case, therefore,
is the sum of the partitioning time and the time for all the recursive calls, or
Θ(1) + 8 T  ( n /2).
Thus, omitting the statement of the base case, our recurrence for the
running time of M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y -R ECURSIVE  is
As we’ll see from the master method in Section 4.5 , recurrence (4.9) has the
solution T  ( n ) = Θ( n3), which means that it has the same asymptotic running
time as the straightforward M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y  procedure.
Why is the Θ( n3) solution to this recurrence so much lar ger than the Θ( n
lg n ) solution to the mer ge-sort recurrence (2.3) on page 41? After all, the
recurrence for mer ge sort contains a Θ( n ) term, whereas the recurrence for
recursive matrix multiplication contains only a Θ(1) term.
Page number: 118
Let’ s think about what the recursion tree for recurrence (4.9) would look
like as compared with the recursion tree for mer ge sort, illustrated in Figure
2.5  on page 43. The factor of 2 in the mer ge-sort recurrence determines how
many children each tree node has, which in turn determines how many
terms contribute to the sum at each level of the tree. In comparison, for the
recurrence (4.9) for M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y -R ECURSIVE , each internal node in the
recursion tree has eight children, not two, leading to a “bushier” recursion
tree with many more leaves, despite the fact that the internal nodes are each
much smaller . Consequently , the solution to recurrence (4.9) grows much
more quickly than the solution to recurrence (2.3), which is borne out in the
actual solutions: Θ( n3) versus Θ( n  lg n ).
Exer cises
Note:  Y ou may wish to read Section 4.5  before attempting some of these
exercises.
4.1-1
Generalize M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y -R ECURSIVE  to multiply n  × n  matrices for
which n  is not necessarily an exact power of 2. Give a recurrence describing
its running time. Ar gue that it runs in Θ( n3) time in the worst case.
4.1-2
How quickly can you multiply a k n  × n  matrix ( k n  rows and n  columns) by
an n  × k n  matrix, where k  ≥ 1, using M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y -R ECURSIVE  as a
subroutine? Answer the same question for multiplying an n  × k n  matrix by
a k n  × n  matrix. Which is asymptotically faster , and by how much?
4.1-3
Suppose that instead of partitioning matrices by index calculation in
M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y -R ECURSIVE , you copy the appropriate elements of A , B ,
and C  into separate n /2 × n /2 submatrices A1 1 , A12 , A21 , A22 ; B1 1 , B12 , B21 ,
B22 ; and C1 1 , C12 , C21 , C22 , respectively . After the recursive calls, you copy
the results from C1 1 , C12 , C21 , and C22  back into the appropriate places in C .
How does recurrence (4.9) change, and what is its solution?
4.1-4
Page number: 119
W rite pseudocode for a divide-and-conquer algorithm MA TRIX-ADD-
R ECURSIVE  that sums two n  × n  matrices A  and B  by partitioning each of
them into four n /2 × n /2 submatrices and then recursively summing
corresponding pairs of submatrices. Assume that matrix partitioning uses
Θ(1)-time index calculations. W rite a recurrence for the worst-case running
time of M A TRIX -A DD -R ECURSIVE , and solve your recurrence. What happens
if you use Θ( n2)-time copying to implement the partitioning instead of
index calculations?
4.2      Strassen’ s algorithm for matrix multiplication
Y ou might find it hard to imagine that any matrix multiplication algorithm
could take less than Θ( n3) time, since the natural definition of matrix
multiplication requires n3 scalar multiplications. Indeed, many
mathematicians presumed that it was not possible to multiply matrices in
o ( n3) time until 1969, when V . Strassen [ 424 ] published a remarkable
recursive algorithm for multiplying n  × n  matrices. Strassen’ s algorithm
runs in Θ( nlg 7) time. Since lg 7 = 2.8073549 …, Strassen’ s algorithm runs
in O ( n2.81) time, which is asymptotically better than the Θ( n3) M A TRIX -
M UL TIPL Y  and M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y -R ECURSIVE  procedures.
The key to Strassen’ s method is to use the divide-and-conquer idea from
the M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y -R ECURSIVE  procedure, but make the recursion tree
less bushy . W e’ll actually increase the work for each divide and combine
step by a constant factor , but the reduction in bushiness will pay of f. W e
won’ t reduce the bushiness from the eight-way branching of recurrence
(4.9) all the way down to the two-way branching of recurrence (2.3), but
we’ll improve it just a little, and that will make a big dif ference. Instead of
performing eight recursive multiplications of n /2 × n /2 matrices, Strassen’ s
algorithm performs only seven. The cost of eliminating one matrix
multiplication is several new additions and subtractions of n /2 × n /2
matrices, but still only a constant number . Rather than saying “additions and
subtractions” everywhere, we’ll adopt the common terminology of calling
them both “additions” because subtraction is structurally the same
computation as addition, except for a change of sign.
T o get an inkling how the number of multiplications might be reduced,
as well as why reducing the number of multiplications might be desirable
Page number: 120
for matrix calculations, suppose that you have two numbers x  and y , and
you want to calculate the quantity x2 – y2. The straightforward calculation
requires two multiplications to square x  and y , followed by one subtraction
(which you can think of as a “negative addition”). But let’ s recall the old
algebra trick x2 – y2 = x2 – xy  + xy  – y2 = x ( x  – y ) + y ( x  – y ) = ( x  + y )( x  – y ).
Using this formulation of the desired quantity , you could instead compute
the sum x  + y  and the dif ference x  – y  and then multiply them, requiring
only a single multiplication and two additions. At the cost of an extra
addition, only one multiplication is needed to compute an expression that
looks as if it requires two. If x  and y  are scalars, there’ s not much
dif ference: both approaches require three scalar operations. If x  and y  are
lar ge matrices, however , the cost of multiplying outweighs the cost of
adding, in which case the second method outperforms the first, although not
asymptotically .
Strassen’ s strategy for reducing the number of matrix multiplications at
the expense of more matrix additions is not at all obvious—perhaps the
biggest understatement in this book! As with M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y -R ECURSIVE ,
Strassen’ s algorithm uses the divide-and-conquer method to compute C  = C
+ A  · B , where A , B , and C  are all n  × n  matrices and n  is an exact power of
2. Strassen’ s algorithm computes the four submatrices C1 1 , C12 , C21 , and
C22  of C  from equations (4.5)–(4.8) on page 82 in four steps. W e’ll analyze
costs as we go along to develop a recurrence T  ( n ) for the overall running
time. Let’ s see how it works:
1 . If n  = 1, the matrices each contain a single element. Perform a
single scalar multiplication and a single scalar addition, as in line 3
of M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y -R ECURSIVE , taking Θ(1) time, and return.
Otherwise, partition the input matrices A  and B  and output matrix C
into n /2 × n /2 submatrices, as in equation (4.2). This step takes Θ(1)
time by index calculation, just as in M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y -R ECURSIVE .
2 . Create n /2 × n /2 matrices S1 , S2 , … , S10 , each of which is the sum
or dif ference of two submatrices from step 1. Create and zero the
entries of seven n /2 × n /2 matrices P1 , P2 , … , P7  to hold seven n /2
× n /2 matrix products. All 17 matrices can be created, and the Pi
initialized, in Θ( n2) time.
Page number: 121
3 . Using the submatrices from step 1 and the matrices S1 , S2 , … , S10
created in step 2, recursively compute each of the seven matrix
products P1 , P2 , … , P7 , taking 7 T  ( n /2) time.
4 . Update the four submatrices C1 1 , C12 , C21 , C22  of the result matrix
C  by adding or subtracting various Pi  matrices, which takes Θ( n2)
time.
W e’ll see the details of steps 2–4 in a moment, but we already have
enough information to set up a recurrence for the running time of Strassen’ s
method. As is common, the base case in step 1 takes Θ(1) time, which we’ll
omit when stating the recurrence. When n  > 1, steps 1, 2, and 4 take a total
of Θ( n2) time, and step 3 requires seven multiplications of n /2 × n /2
matrices. Hence, we obtain the following recurrence for the running time of
Strassen’ s algorithm:
Compared with M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y -R ECURSIVE , we have traded of f one
recursive submatrix multiplication for a constant number of submatrix
additions. Once you understand recurrences and their solutions, you’ll be
able to see why this trade-of f actually leads to a lower asymptotic running
time. By the master method in Section 4.5 , recurrence (4.10) has the
solution T  ( n ) = Θ( nlg 7) = O ( n2.81), beating the Θ( n3)-time algorithms.
Now , let’ s delve into the details. Step 2 creates the following 10
matrices:
S 1 = B 12  – B 22 ,
S 2 = A 1 1  + A 12 ,
S 3 = A 21  + A 22 ,
S 4 = B 21  – B 1 1,
S 5 = A 1 1  + A 22 ,
S 6 = B 1 1  + B 22 ,
S 7 = A 12  – A 22 ,
S 8 = B 21  + B 22 ,
S 9 = A 1 1  – A 21,
S 10 = B 1 1  + B 12 .
Page number: 122
This step adds or subtracts n /2 × n /2 matrices 10 times, taking Θ( n2) time.
Step 3 recursively multiplies n /2 × n /2 matrices 7 times to compute the
following n /2 × n /2 matrices, each of which is the sum or dif ference of
products of A  and B  submatrices:
P 1 = A 1 1  · S 1 (= A 1 1  · B 12  – A 1 1  · B 22 ),
P 2 = S 2  · B 22 (= A 1 1  · B 22  + A 12  · B 22 ),
P 3 = S 3  · B 1 1 (= A 21  · B 1 1  + A 22  · B 1 1 ),
P 4 = A 22  · S 4 (= A 22  · B 21  – A 22  · B 1 1 ),
P 5 = S 5  · S 6 (= A 1 1  · B 1 1  + A 1 1  · B 22  + A 22  · B 1 1  + A 22  · B 22 ),
P 6 = S 7  · S 8 (= A 12  · B 21  + A 12  · B 22  – A 22  · B 21  – A 22  · B 22 ),
P 7 = S 9  · S 10 (= A 1 1  · B 1 1  + A 1 1  · B 12  – A 21  · B 1 1  – A 21  · B 12 ).
The only multiplications that the algorithm performs are those in the middle
column of these equations. The right-hand column just shows what these
products equal in terms of the original submatrices created in step 1, but the
terms are never explicitly calculated by the algorithm.
Step 4 adds to and subtracts from the four n /2 × n /2 submatrices of the
product C  the various Pi  matrices created in step 3. W e start with
C1 1  = C1 1  + P5  + P4  – P2  + P6 .
Expanding the calculation on the right-hand side, with the expansion of
each Pi  on its own line and vertically aligning terms that cancel out, we see
that the update to C1 1  equals
which corresponds to equation (4.5). Similarly , setting
C12  = C12  + P1  + P2
means that the update to C12  equals
Page number: 123
corresponding to equation (4.6). Setting
C21  = C21  + P3  + P4
means that the update to C21  equals
corresponding to equation (4.7). Finally , setting
C22  = C22  + P5  + P1  – P3  – P7
means that the update to C22  equals
which corresponds to equation (4.8). Altogether , since we add or subtract
n /2× n /2 matrices 12 times in step 4, this step indeed takes Θ( n2) time.
W e can see that Strassen’ s remarkable algorithm, comprising steps 1–4,
produces the correct matrix product using 7 submatrix multiplications and
18 submatrix additions. W e can also see that recurrence (4.10) characterizes
its running time. Since Section 4.5  shows that this recurrence has the
solution T  ( n ) = Θ( nlg 7) = o ( n3), Strassen’ s method asymptotically beats the
Θ( n3) M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y  and M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y -R ECURSIVE  procedures.
Exer cises
Note:  Y ou may wish to read Section 4.5  before attempting some of these
exercises.
Page number: 124
4.2-1
Use Strassen’ s algorithm to compute the matrix product
Show your work.
4.2-2
W rite pseudocode for Strassen’ s algorithm.
4.2-3
What is the lar gest k  such that if you can multiply 3 × 3 matrices using k
multiplications (not assuming commutativity of multiplication), then you
can multiply n  × n  matrices in o ( nlg 7) time? What is the running time of this
algorithm?
4.2-4
V . Pan discovered a way of multiplying 68 × 68 matrices using 132,464
multiplications, a way of multiplying 70 × 70 matrices using 143,640
multiplications, and a way of multiplying 72 × 72 matrices using 155,424
multiplications. Which method yields the best asymptotic running time
when used in a divide-and-conquer matrix-multiplication algorithm? How
does it compare with Strassen’ s algorithm?
4.2-5
Show how to multiply the complex numbers a  + bi  and c  + d i  using only
three multiplications of real numbers. The algorithm should take a , b , c , and
d  as input and produce the real component ac  – bd  and the imaginary
component ad  + bc  separately .
4.2-6
Suppose that you have a Θ( nα)-time algorithm for squaring n  × n  matrices,
where α  ≥ 2. Show how to use that algorithm to multiply two dif ferent n  × n
matrices in Θ( nα) time.
4.3      The substitution method for solving r ecurr ences
Page number: 125
Now that you have seen how recurrences characterize the running times of
divide-and-conquer algorithms, let’ s learn how to solve them. W e start in
this section with the substitution method , which is the most general of the
four methods in this chapter . The substitution method comprises two steps:
1 . Guess the form of the solution using symbolic constants.
2 . Use mathematical induction to show that the solution works, and
find the constants.
T o apply the inductive hypothesis, you substitute the guessed solution for
the function on smaller values—hence the name “substitution method.”
This method is powerful, but you must guess the form of the answer .
Although generating a good guess might seem dif ficult, a little practice can
quickly improve your intuition.
Y ou can use the substitution method to establish either an upper or a
lower bound on a recurrence. It’ s usually best not to try to do both at the
same time. That is, rather than trying to prove a Θ-bound directly , first
prove an O -bound, and then prove an Ω-bound. T ogether , they give you a
Θ-bound (Theorem 3.1 on page 56).
As an example of the substitution method, let’ s determine an asymptotic
upper bound on the recurrence:
This recurrence is similar to recurrence (2.3) on page 41 for mer ge sort,
except for the floor function, which ensures that T  ( n ) is defined over the
integers. Let’ s guess that the asymptotic upper bound is the same— T  ( n ) =
O ( n  lg n )—and use the substitution method to prove it.
W e’ll adopt the inductive hypothesis that T  ( n ) ≤ c n  lg n  for all n  ≥ n0 ,
where we’ll choose the specific constants c  > 0 and n0  > 0 later , after we see
what constraints they need to obey . If we can establish this inductive
hypothesis, we can conclude that T  ( n ) = O ( n  lg n ). It would be dangerous
to use T  ( n ) = O ( n  lg n ) as the inductive hypothesis because the constants
matter , as we’ll see in a moment in our discussion of pitfalls.
Assume by induction that this bound holds for all numbers at least as big
as n0  and less than n . In particular , therefore, if n  ≥ 2 n0 , it holds for ⌊ n /2 ⌋ ,
yielding T  ( ⌊ n /2 ⌋ ) ≤ c  ⌊ n /2 ⌋  lg( ⌊ n /2 ⌋ ). Substituting into recurrence (4.1 1)—
hence the name “substitution” method—yields
Page number: 126
T  ( n ) ≤ 2( c  ⌊ n /2 ⌋  lg( ⌊ n /2 ⌋ )) + Θ( n )
≤ 2( c ( n /2) lg( n /2)) + Θ( n )
= cn  lg( n /2) + Θ( n )
= cn  lg n  – cn  lg 2 + Θ( n )
= cn  lg n  – cn  + Θ( n )
≤ cn  lg n ,
where the last step holds if we constrain the constants n0  and c  to be
suf ficiently lar ge that for n  ≥ 2 n0 , the quantity cn  dominates the anonymous
function hidden by the Θ( n ) term.
W e’ve shown that the inductive hypothesis holds for the inductive case,
but we also need to prove that the inductive hypothesis holds for the base
cases of the induction, that is, that T  ( n ) ≤ cn  lg n  when n0  ≤ n  < 2 n0 . As
long as n0  > 1 (a new constraint on n0 ), we have lg n  > 0, which implies that
n  lg n  > 0. So let’ s pick n0  = 2. Since the base case of recurrence (4.1 1) is
not stated explicitly , by our convention, T  ( n ) is algorithmic, which means
that T  (2) and T  (3) are constant (as they should be if they describe the
worst-case running time of any real program on inputs of size 2 or 3).
Picking c  = max { T  (2), T  (3)} yields T  (2) ≤ c  < (2 lg 2) c  and T  (3) ≤ c  < (3
lg 3) c , establishing the inductive hypothesis for the base cases.
Thus, we have T  ( n ) ≤ cn  lg n  for all n  ≥ 2, which implies that the
solution to recurrence (4.1 1) is T  ( n ) = O ( n  lg n ).
In the algorithms literature, people rarely carry out their substitution
proofs to this level of detail, especially in their treatment of base cases. The
reason is that for most algorithmic divide-and-conquer recurrences, the base
cases are all handled in pretty much the same way . Y ou ground the
induction on a range of values from a convenient positive constant n0  up to
some constant 
  such that for 
 , the recurrence always bottoms
out in a constant-sized base case between n0  and 
 . (This example used 
.) Then, it’ s usually apparent, without spelling out the details, that
with a suitably lar ge choice of the leading constant (such as c  for this
example), the inductive hypothesis can be made to hold for all the values in
the range from n0  to 
 .
Making a good guess
Page number: 127
Unfortunately , there is no general way to correctly guess the tightest
asymptotic solution to an arbitrary recurrence. Making a good guess takes
experience and, occasionally , creativity . Fortunately , learning some
recurrence-solving heuristics, as well as playing around with recurrences to
gain experience, can help you become a good guesser . Y ou can also use
recursion trees, which we’ll see in Section 4.4 , to help generate good
guesses.
If a recurrence is similar to one you’ve seen before, then guessing a
similar solution is reasonable. As an example, consider the recurrence
T  ( n ) = 2 T  ( n /2 + 17) + Θ( n ),
defined on the reals. This recurrence looks somewhat like the mer ge-sort
recurrence (2.3), but it’ s more complicated because of the added “17” in the
ar gument to T  on the right-hand side. Intuitively , however , this additional
term shouldn’ t substantially af fect the solution to the recurrence. When n  is
lar ge, the relative dif ference between n /2 and n /2 + 17 is not that lar ge: both
cut n  nearly in half. Consequently , it makes sense to guess that T  ( n ) = O ( n
lg n ), which you can verify is correct using the substitution method (see
Exercise 4.3-1).
Another way to make a good guess is to determine loose upper and
lower bounds on the recurrence and then reduce your range of uncertainty .
For example, you might start with a lower bound of T  ( n ) = Ω( n ) for
recurrence (4.1 1), since the recurrence includes the term Θ( n ), and you can
prove an initial upper bound of T  ( n ) = O ( n2). Then split your time between
trying to lower the upper bound and trying to raise the lower bound until
you conver ge on the correct, asymptotically tight solution, which in this
case is T  ( n ) = Θ( n  lg n ).
A trick of the trade: subtracting a low-order term
Sometimes, you might correctly guess a tight asymptotic bound on the
solution of a recurrence, but somehow the math fails to work out in the
induction proof. The problem frequently turns out to be that the inductive
assumption is not strong enough. The trick to resolving this problem is to
revise your guess by subtracting  a lower -order term when you hit such a
snag. The math then often goes through.
Consider the recurrence
Page number: 128
defined on the reals. Let’ s guess that the solution is T  ( n ) = O ( n ) and try to
show that T  ( n ) ≤ cn  for n  ≥ n0 , where we choose the constants c , n0  > 0
suitably . Substituting our guess into the recurrence, we obtain
T  ( n ) ≤ 2( c ( n /2)) + Θ(1)
= cn  + Θ(1),
which, unfortunately , does not imply that T  ( n ) ≤ cn  for any  choice of c . W e
might be tempted to try a lar ger guess, say T  ( n ) = O ( n2). Although this
lar ger guess works, it provides only a loose upper bound. It turns out that
our original guess of T  ( n ) = O ( n ) is correct and tight. In order to show that
it is correct, however , we must strengthen our inductive hypothesis.
Intuitively , our guess is nearly right: we are of f only by Θ(1), a lower -
order term. Nevertheless, mathematical induction requires us to prove the
exact  form of the inductive hypothesis. Let’ s try our trick of subtracting a
lower -order term from our previous guess: T  ( n ) ≤ cn  – d , where d  ≥ 0 is a
constant. W e now have
T  ( n ) ≤ 2( c ( n /2) – d ) + Θ(1)
= cn  – 2 d  + Θ(1)
≤ cn  – d  – ( d  – Θ(1))
≤ cn  – d
as long as we choose d  to be lar ger than the anonymous upper -bound
constant hidden by the Θ-notation. Subtracting a lower -order term works!
Of course, we must not for get to handle the base case, which is to choose
the constant c  lar ge enough that cn  – d  dominates the implicit base cases.
Y ou might find the idea of subtracting a lower -order term to be
counterintuitive. After all, if the math doesn’ t work out, shouldn’ t you
increase your guess? Not necessarily! When the recurrence contains more
than one recursive invocation (recurrence (4.12) contains two), if you add a
lower -order term to the guess, then you end up adding it once for each of
the recursive invocations. Doing so takes you even further away from the
inductive hypothesis. On the other hand, if you subtract a lower -order term
from the guess, then you get to subtract it once for each of the recursive
invocations. In the above example, we subtracted the constant d  twice
because the coef ficient of T  ( n /2) is 2. W e ended up with the inequality T
( n ) ≤ cn  – d  – ( d  – Θ(1)), and we readily found a suitable value for d .
Page number: 129
A voiding pitfalls
A void using asymptotic notation in the inductive hypothesis for the
substitution method because it’ s error prone. For example, for recurrence
(4.1 1), we can falsely “prove” that T  ( n ) = O ( n ) if we unwisely adopt T  ( n )
= O ( n ) as our inductive hypothesis:
T  ( n ) ≤ 2 · O ( ⌊ n /2 ⌋ ) + Θ( n )
= 2 · O ( n ) + Θ( n )
= O ( n ).
  wr ong !
The problem with this reasoning is that the constant hidden by the O -
notation changes. W e can expose the fallacy by repeating the “proof” using
an explicit constant. For the inductive hypothesis, assume that T  ( n ) ≤ cn  for
all n  ≥ n0 , where c , n0  > 0 are constants. Repeating the first two steps in the
inequality chain yields
T  ( n ) ≤ 2( c  ⌊ n /2 ⌋ ) + Θ( n )
≤ cn  + Θ( n ).
Now , indeed cn  + Θ( n ) = O ( n ), but the constant hidden by the O -notation
must be lar ger than c  because the anonymous function hidden by the Θ( n ) is
asymptotically positive. W e cannot take the third step to conclude that cn  +
Θ( n ) ≤ cn , thus exposing the fallacy .
When using the substitution method, or more generally mathematical
induction, you must be careful that the constants hidden by any asymptotic
notation are the same constants throughout the proof. Consequently , it’ s
best to avoid asymptotic notation in your inductive hypothesis and to name
constants explicitly .
Here’ s another fallacious use of the substitution method to show that the
solution to recurrence (4.1 1) is T  ( n ) = O ( n ). W e guess T  ( n ) ≤ cn  and then
ar gue
T  ( n ) ≤ 2( c  ⌊ n /2 ⌋ ) + Θ( n )
≤ cn  + Θ( n )
= O ( n ),
  wr ong !
since c  is a positive constant. The mistake stems from the dif ference
between our goal—to prove that T  ( n ) = O ( n )—and our inductive
hypothesis—to prove that T  ( n ) ≤ cn . When using the substitution method,
or in any inductive proof, you must prove the exact  statement of the
Page number: 130
inductive hypothesis. In this case, we must explicitly prove that T  ( n ) ≤ cn
to show that T  ( n ) = O ( n ).
Exer cises
4.3-1
Use the substitution method to show that each of the following recurrences
defined on the reals has the asymptotic solution specified:
a.  T  ( n ) = T  ( n  – 1) + n  has solution T  ( n ) = O ( n2).
b.  T  ( n ) = T  ( n /2) + Θ(1) has solution T  ( n ) = O (lg n ).
c.  T  ( n ) = 2 T  ( n /2) + n  has solution T  ( n ) = Θ( n  lg n ).
d.  T  ( n ) = 2 T  ( n /2 + 17) + n  has solution T  ( n ) = O ( n  lg n ).
e.  T  ( n ) = 2 T  ( n /3) + Θ( n ) has solution T  ( n ) = Θ( n ).
f.  T  ( n ) = 4 T  ( n /2) + Θ( n ) has solution T  ( n ) = Θ( n2).
4.3-2
The solution to the recurrence T  ( n ) = 4 T  ( n /2)+ n  turns out to be T  ( n ) =
Θ( n2). Show that a substitution proof with the assumption T  ( n ) ≤ cn2 fails.
Then show how to subtract a lower -order term to make a substitution proof
work.
4.3-3
The recurrence T  ( n ) = 2 T  ( n  – 1) + 1 has the solution T  ( n ) = O (2n). Show
that a substitution proof fails with the assumption T  ( n ) ≤ c  2n, where c  > 0
is constant. Then show how to subtract a lower -order term to make a
substitution proof work.
4.4      The r ecursion-tr ee method for solving r ecurr ences
Although you can use the substitution method to prove that a solution to a
recurrence is correct, you might have trouble coming up with a good guess.
Drawing out a recursion tree, as we did in our analysis of the mer ge-sort
recurrence in Section 2.3.2 , can help. In a recursion tree , each node
represents the cost of a single subproblem somewhere in the set of recursive
Page number: 131
function invocations. Y ou typically sum the costs within each level of the
tree to obtain the per -level costs, and then you sum all the per -level costs to
determine the total cost of all levels of the recursion. Sometimes, however ,
adding up the total cost takes more creativity .
A recursion tree is best used to generate intuition for a good guess,
which you can then verify by the substitution method. If you are meticulous
when drawing out a recursion tree and summing the costs, however , you
can use a recursion tree as a direct proof of a solution to a recurrence. But if
you use it only to generate a good guess, you can often tolerate a small
amount of “sloppiness,” which can simplify the math. When you verify
your guess with the substitution method later on, your math should be
precise. This section demonstrates how you can use recursion trees to solve
recurrences, generate good guesses, and gain intuition for recurrences.
An illustrative example
Let’ s see how a recursion tree can provide a good guess for an upper -bound
solution to the recurrence
Figure 4.1  shows how to derive the recursion tree for T  ( n ) = 3 T  ( n /4) + cn2,
where the constant c  > 0 is the upper -bound constant in the Θ( n2) term. Part
(a) of the figure shows T  ( n ), which part (b) expands into an equivalent tree
representing the recurrence. The cn2 term at the root represents the cost at
the top level of recursion, and the three subtrees of the root represent the
costs incurred by the subproblems of size n /4. Part (c) shows this process
carried one step further by expanding each node with cost T  ( n /4) from part
(b). The cost for each of the three children of the root is c ( n /4)2. W e
continue expanding each node in the tree by breaking it into its constituent
parts as determined by the recurrence.
Page number: 132
Figur e 4.1  Constructing a recursion tree for the recurrence T  ( n ) = 3 T  ( n /4) + cn2. Part (a)  shows T
( n ), which progressively expands in (b)–(d)  to form the recursion tree. The fully expanded tree in (d)
has height log 4  n .
Because subproblem sizes decrease by a factor of 4 every time we go
down one level, the recursion must eventually bottom out in a base case
where n  < n0 . By convention, the base case is T  ( n ) = Θ(1) for n  < n0 , where
n0  > 0 is any threshold constant suf ficiently lar ge that the recurrence is well
Page number: 133
defined. For the purpose of intuition, however , let’ s simplify the math a
little. Let’ s assume that n  is an exact power of 4 and that the base case is T
(1) = Θ(1). As it turns out, these assumptions don’ t af fect the asymptotic
solution.
What’ s the height of the recursion tree? The subproblem size for a node
at depth i  is n /4i. As we descend the tree from the root, the subproblem size
hits n  = 1 when n /4i = 1 or , equivalently , when i  = log4  n . Thus, the tree has
internal nodes at depths 0, 1, 2, … , log4  n  – 1 and leaves at depth log4  n .
Part (d) of Figure 4.1  shows the cost at each level of the tree. Each level
has three times as many nodes as the level above, and so the number of
nodes at depth i  is 3i. Because subproblem sizes reduce by a factor of 4 for
each level further from the root, each internal node at depth i  = 0, 1, 2, … ,
log4  n  – 1 has a cost of c ( n /4i)2. Multiplying, we see that the total cost of all
nodes at a given depth i  is 3ic ( n /4i)2 = (3/16)icn2. The bottom level, at depth
log4  n , contains 
  leaves (using equation (3.21) on page 66).
Each leaf contributes Θ(1), leading to a total leaf cost of 
 .
Now we add up the costs over all levels to determine the cost for the
entire tree:
W e’ve derived the guess of T  ( n ) = O ( n2) for the original recurrence. In this
example, the coef ficients of cn2 form a decreasing geometric series. By
equation (A.7), the sum of these coef ficients is bounded from above by the
Page number: 134
constant 16/13. Since the root’ s contribution to the total cost is cn2, the cost
of the root dominates the total cost of the tree.
In fact, if O ( n2) is indeed an upper bound for the recurrence (as we’ll
verify in a moment), then it must be a tight bound. Why? The first recursive
call contributes a cost of Θ( n2), and so Ω( n2) must be a lower bound for the
recurrence.
Let’ s now use the substitution method to verify that our guess is correct,
namely , that T  ( n ) = O ( n2) is an upper bound for the recurrence T  ( n ) = 3 T
( n /4)+Θ( n2). W e want to show that T  ( n ) ≤ dn2 for some constant d  > 0.
Using the same constant c  > 0 as before, we have
T  ( n ) ≤3 T  ( n /4) + cn2
≤3 d ( n /4)2 + cn2
=
≤dn2,
where the last step holds if we choose d  ≥ (16/13) c .
For the base case of the induction, let n0  > 0 be a suf ficiently lar ge
threshold constant that the recurrence is well defined when T  ( n ) = Θ(1) for
n  < n0 . W e can pick d  lar ge enough that d  dominates the constant hidden by
the Θ, in which case dn2 ≥ d  ≥ T  ( n ) for 1 ≤ n  < n0 , completing the proof of
the base case.
The substitution proof we just saw involves two named constants, c  and
d . W e named c  and used it to stand for the upper -bound constant hidden and
guaranteed to exist by the Θ-notation. W e cannot pick c  arbitrarily—it’ s
given to us—although, for any such c , any constant c′ ≥ c  also suf fices. W e
also named d , but we were free to choose any value for it that fit our needs.
In this example, the value of d  happened to depend on the value of c , which
is fine, since d  is constant if c  is constant.
An irr egular example
Let’ s find an asymptotic upper bound for another , more irregular , example.
Figure 4.2  shows the recursion tree for the recurrence

Page number: 135
This recursion tree is unbalanced, with dif ferent root-to-leaf paths having
dif ferent lengths. Going left at any node produces a subproblem of one-third
the size, and going right produces a subproblem of two-thirds the size. Let
n0  > 0 be the implicit threshold constant such that T  ( n ) = Θ(1) for 0 < n  <
n0 , and let c  represent the upper -bound constant hidden by the Θ( n ) term for
n  ≥ n0 . There are actually two n0  constants here—one for the threshold in
the recurrence, and the other for the threshold in the Θ-notation, so we’ll let
n0  be the lar ger of the two constants.
Figur e 4.2  A recursion tree for the recurrence T  ( n ) = T  ( n /3) + T  (2 n /3) + cn .
The height of the tree runs down the right edge of the tree,
corresponding to subproblems of sizes n , (2/3) n , (4/9) n , … , Θ(1) with costs
bounded by cn , c (2 n /3), c (4 n /9), … , Θ(1), respectively . W e hit the
rightmost leaf when (2/3)hn  < n0  ≤ (2/3)h –1n , which happens when h  =
⌊ log3/2 ( n / n0 ) ⌋  + 1 since, applying the floor bounds in equation (3.2) on page
64 with x  = log3/2  ( n / n0 ), we have (2/3)hn  = (2/3)⌊ x ⌋ +1n  < (2/3)xn  = ( n0 / n ) n  =
Page number: 136
n0  and (2/3)h –1n  = (2/3)⌊ x ⌋n  > (2/3)xn  = ( n0 / n ) n  = n0 . Thus, the height of the
tree is h  = Θ(lg n ).
W e’re now in a position to understand the upper bound. Let’ s postpone
dealing with the leaves for a moment. Summing the costs of internal nodes
across each level, we have at most cn  per level times the Θ(lg n ) tree height
for a total cost of O ( n  lg n ) for all internal nodes.
It remains to deal with the leaves of the recursion tree, which represent
base cases, each costing Θ(1). How many leaves are there? It’ s tempting to
upper -bound their number by the number of leaves in a complete binary tree
of height h  = ⌊ log3/2 ( n / n0 ) ⌋  + 1, since the recursion tree is contained within
such a complete binary tree. But this approach turns out to give us a poor
bound. The complete binary tree has 1 node at the root, 2 nodes at depth 1,
and generally 2k nodes at depth k . Since the height is h  = ⌊ log3/2  n ⌋  + 1,
there are 
  leaves in the complete binary tree,
which is an upper bound on the number of leaves in the recursion tree.
Because the cost of each leaf is Θ(1), this analysis says that the total cost of
all leaves in the recursion tree is 
 , which is an
asymptotically greater bound than the O ( n  lg n ) cost of all internal nodes. In
fact, as we’re about to see, this bound is not tight. The cost of all leaves in
the recursion tree is O ( n )—asymptotically less  than O ( n  lg n ). In other
words, the cost of the internal nodes dominates the cost of the leaves, not
vice versa.
Rather than analyzing the leaves, we could quit right now and prove by
substitution that T  ( n ) = Θ( n  lg n ). This approach works (see Exercise 4.4-
3), but it’ s instructive to understand how many leaves this recursion tree
has. Y ou may see recurrences for which the cost of leaves dominates the
cost of internal nodes, and then you’ll be in better shape if you’ve had some
experience analyzing the number of leaves.
T o figure out how many leaves there really are, let’ s write a recurrence
L ( n ) for the number of leaves in the recursion tree for T  ( n ). Since all the
leaves in T  ( n ) belong either to the left subtree or the right subtree of the
root, we have

Page number: 137
This recurrence is similar to recurrence (4.14), but it’ s missing the Θ( n )
term, and it contains an explicit base case. Because this recurrence omits
the Θ( n ) term, it is much easier to solve. Let’ s apply the substitution method
to show that it has solution L ( n ) = O ( n ). Using the inductive hypothesis L ( n )
≤ dn  for some constant d  > 0, and assuming that the inductive hypothesis
holds for all values less than n , we have
L ( n ) = L ( n /3) + L (2 n /3)
≤ dn /3 + 2( dn )/3
≤ dn ,
which holds for any d  > 0. W e can now choose d  lar ge enough to handle the
base case L ( n ) = 1 for 0 < n  < n0 , for which d  = 1 suf fices, thereby
completing the substitution method for the upper bound on leaves.
(Exercise 4.4-2 asks you to prove that L ( n ) = Θ( n ).)
Returning to recurrence (4.14) for T  ( n ), it now becomes apparent that
the total cost of leaves over all levels must be L ( n ) · Θ(1) = Θ( n ). Since we
have derived the bound of O ( n  lg n ) on the cost of the internal nodes, it
follows that the solution to recurrence (4.14) is T  ( n ) = O ( n  lg n ) + Θ( n ) =
O ( n  lg n ). (Exercise 4.4-3 asks you to prove that T  ( n ) = Θ( n  lg n ).)
It’ s wise to verify any bound obtained with a recursion tree by using the
substitution method, especially if you’ve made simplifying assumptions.
But another strategy altogether is to use more-powerful mathematics,
typically in the form of the master method in the next section (which
unfortunately doesn’ t apply to recurrence (4.14)) or the Akra-Bazzi method
(which does, but requires calculus). Even if you use a powerful method, a
recursion tree can improve your intuition for what’ s going on beneath the
heavy math.
Exer cises
4.4-1
For each of the following recurrences, sketch its recursion tree, and guess a
good asymptotic upper bound on its solution. Then use the substitution
method to verify your answer .
a.  T  ( n ) = T  ( n /2) + n3.
b.  T  ( n ) = 4 T  ( n /3) + n .
Page number: 138
c.  T  ( n ) = 4 T  ( n /2) + n .
d.  T  ( n ) = 3 T  ( n  – 1) + 1.
4.4-2
Use the substitution method to prove that recurrence (4.15) has the
asymptotic lower bound L ( n ) = Ω( n ). Conclude that L ( n ) = Θ( n ).
4.4-3
Use the substitution method to prove that recurrence (4.14) has the solution
T  ( n ) = Ω( n  lg n ). Conclude that T  ( n ) = Θ( n  lg n ).
4.4-4
Use a recursion tree to justify a good guess for the solution to the
recurrence T  ( n ) = T  ( αn )+ T  ((1– α ) n )+Θ( n ), where α  is a constant in the
range 0 < α  < 1.
4.5      The master method for solving r ecurr ences
The master method provides a “cookbook” method for solving algorithmic
recurrences of the form
where a  > 0 and b  > 1 are constants. W e call f  ( n ) a driving function , and
we call a recurrence of this general form a master recurrence . T o use the
master method, you need to memorize three cases, but then you’ll be able to
solve many master recurrences quite easily .
A master recurrence describes the running time of a divide-and-conquer
algorithm that divides a problem of size n  into a  subproblems, each of size
n / b  < n . The algorithm solves the a  subproblems recursively , each in T  ( n / b )
time. The driving function f  ( n ) encompasses the cost of dividing the
problem before the recursion, as well as the cost of combining the results of
the recursive solutions to subproblems. For example, the recurrence arising
from Strassen’ s algorithm is a master recurrence with a  = 7, b  = 2, and
driving function f  ( n ) = Θ( n2).
As we have mentioned, in solving a recurrence that describes the
running time of an algorithm, one technicality that we’d often prefer to
ignore is the requirement that the input size n  be an integer . For example,
Page number: 139
we saw that the running time of mer ge sort can be described by recurrence
(2.3), T  ( n ) = 2 T  ( n /2) + Θ( n ), on page 41. But if n  is an odd number , we
really don’ t have two problems of exactly half the size. Rather , to ensure
that the problem sizes are integers, we round one subproblem down to size
⌊ n /2 ⌋  and the other up to size ⌈ n /2 ⌉ , so the true recurrence is T  ( n ) = T  ( ⌈ n /2 ⌉
+ T  ( ⌊ n /2 ⌋ ) + Θ( n ). But this floors-and-ceilings recurrence is longer to write
and messier to deal with than recurrence (2.3), which is defined on the
reals. W e’d rather not worry about floors and ceilings, if we don’ t have to,
especially since the two recurrences have the same Θ( n  lg n ) solution.
The master method allows you to state a master recurrence without
floors and ceilings and implicitly infer them. No matter how the ar guments
are rounded up or down to the nearest integer , the asymptotic bounds that it
provides remain the same. Moreover , as we’ll see in Section 4.6 , if you
define your master recurrence on the reals, without implicit floors and
ceilings, the asymptotic bounds still don’ t change. Thus you can ignore
floors and ceilings for master recurrences. Section 4.7  gives suf ficient
conditions for ignoring floors and ceilings in more general divide-and-
conquer recurrences.
The master theor em
The master method depends upon the following theorem.
Theorem 4.1 (Master theorem)
Let a  > 0 and b  > 1 be constants, and let f  ( n ) be a driving function that is
defined and nonnegative on all suf ficiently lar ge reals. Define the
recurrence T  ( n ) on n  ∈  N  by
where aT  ( n / b ) actually means a′T  ( ⌊ n / b ⌋ ) + a″T  ( ⌈ n / b ⌉ ) for some constants
a′ ≥ 0 and a″ ≥ 0 satisfying a  = a′ + a″. Then the asymptotic behavior of T
( n ) can be characterized as follows:
1 . If there exists a constant ϵ  > 0 such that 
 , then 
.
2 . If there exists a constant k  ≥ 0 such that 
 , then 
.
Page number: 140
3 . If there exists a constant ϵ  > 0 such that 
 , and if f
( n ) additionally satisfies the regularity condition  af  ( n / b ) ≤ cf  ( n ) for
some constant c  < 1 and all suf ficiently lar ge n , then T  ( n ) = Θ( f
( n )).
▪
Before applying the master theorem to some examples, let’ s spend a few
moments to understand broadly what it says. The function 
  is called the
watershed function . In each of the three cases, we compare the driving
function f  ( n ) to the watershed function 
 . Intuitively , if the watershed
function grows asymptotically faster than the driving function, then case 1
applies. Case 2 applies if the two functions grow at nearly the same
asymptotic rate. Case 3 is the “opposite” of case 1, where the driving
function grows asymptotically faster than the watershed function. But the
technical details matter .
In case 1, not only must the watershed function grow asymptotically
faster than the driving function, it must grow polynomially  faster . That is,
the watershed function 
  must be asymptotically lar ger than the driving
function f  ( n ) by at least a factor of Θ( nϵ) for some constant ϵ  > 0. The
master theorem then says that the solution is 
 . In this case, if
we look at the recursion tree for the recurrence, the cost per level grows at
least geometrically from root to leaves, and the total cost of leaves
dominates the total cost of the internal nodes.
In case 2, the watershed and driving functions grow at nearly the same
asymptotic rate. But more specifically , the driving function grows faster
than the watershed function by a factor of Θ(lgk n ), where k  ≥ 0. The master
theorem says that we tack on an extra lg n  factor to f  ( n ), yielding the
solution 
 . In this case, each level of the recursion tree
costs approximately the same—
 —and there are Θ(lg n ) levels.
In practice, the most common situation for case 2 occurs when k  = 0, in
which case the watershed and driving functions have the same asymptotic
growth, and the solution is 
 .
Case 3 mirrors case 1. Not only must the driving function grow
asymptotically faster than the watershed function, it must grow
polynomially  faster . That is, the driving function f  ( n ) must be
asymptotically lar ger than the watershed function 
  by at least a factor
Page number: 141
of Θ( nϵ) for some constant ϵ  > 0. Moreover , the driving function must
satisfy the regularity condition that af  ( n / b ) ≤ cf  ( n ). This condition is
satisfied by most of the polynomially bounded functions that you’re likely
to encounter when applying case 3. The regularity condition might not be
satisfied if the driving function grows slowly in local areas, yet relatively
quickly overall. (Exercise 4.5-5 gives an example of such a function.) For
case 3, the master theorem says that the solution is T  ( n ) = Θ( f  ( n )). If we
look at the recursion tree, the cost per level drops at least geometrically
from the root to the leaves, and the root cost dominates the cost of all other
nodes.
It’ s worth looking again at the requirement that there be polynomial
separation between the watershed function and the driving function for
either case 1 or case 3 to apply . The separation doesn’ t need to be much, but
it must be there, and it must grow polynomially . For example, for the
recurrence T  ( n ) = 4 T  ( n /2) + n1.99 (admittedly not a recurrence you’re
likely to see when analyzing an algorithm), the watershed function is 
. Hence the driving function f  ( n ) = n1.99 is polynomially smaller
by a factor of n0.01. Thus case 1 applies with ϵ  = 0.01.
Using the master method
T o use the master method, you determine which case (if any) of the master
theorem applies and write down the answer .
As a first example, consider the recurrence T  ( n ) = 9 T  ( n /3) + n . For this
recurrence, we have a  = 9 and b  = 3, which implies that 
. Since f  ( n ) = n  = O ( n2– ϵ) for any constant ϵ  ≤ 1, we
can apply case 1 of the master theorem to conclude that the solution is T  ( n )
= Θ( n2).
Now consider the recurrence T  ( n ) = T  (2 n /3) + 1, which has a  = 1 and b
= 3/2, which means that the watershed function is 
 .
Case 2 applies since 
 . The solution to the
recurrence is T  ( n ) = Θ(lg n ).
For the recurrence T  ( n ) = 3 T  ( n /4) + n  lg n , we have a  = 3 and b  = 4,
which means that 
 . Since 
, where ϵ  can be as lar ge as approximately 0.2,
case 3 applies as long as the regularity condition holds for f  ( n ). It does,
because for suf ficiently lar ge n , we have that af  ( n / b ) = 3( n /4) lg( n /4) ≤
Page number: 142
(3/4) n  lg n  = cf  ( n ) for c  = 3/4. By case 3, the solution to the recurrence is T
( n ) = Θ( n  lg n ).
Next, let’ s look at the recurrence T  ( n ) = 2 T  ( n /2) + n  lg n , where we
have a  = 2, b  = 2, and 
 . Case 2 applies since 
. W e conclude that the solution is T  ( n ) = Θ( n
lg2 n ).
W e can use the master method to solve the recurrences we saw in
Sections 2.3.2 , 4.1 , and 4.2 .
Recurrence (2.3), T  ( n ) = 2 T  ( n /2) + Θ( n ), on page 41, characterizes the
running time of mer ge sort. Since a  = 2 and b  = 2, the watershed function is 
. Case 2 applies because f  ( n ) = Θ( n ), and the solution is
T  ( n ) = Θ( n  lg n ).
Recurrence (4.9), T  ( n ) = 8 T  ( n /2) + Θ(1), on page 84, describes the
running time of the simple recursive algorithm for matrix multiplication.
W e have a  = 8 and b  = 2, which means that the watershed function is 
. Since n3 is polynomially lar ger than the driving
function f  ( n ) = Θ(1)—indeed, we have f  ( n ) = O ( n3– ϵ) for any positive ϵ  <
3—case 1 applies. W e conclude that T  ( n ) = Θ( n3).
Finally , recurrence (4.10), T  ( n ) = 7 T  ( n /2) + Θ( n2), on page 87, arose
from the analysis of Strassen’ s algorithm for matrix multiplication. For this
recurrence, we have a  = 7 and b  = 2, and the watershed function is 
. Observing that lg 7 = 2.807355 …, we can let ϵ  = 0.8 and
bound the driving function f  ( n ) = Θ( n2) = O ( nlg 7– ϵ). Case 1 applies with
solution T  ( n ) = Θ( nlg 7).
When the master method doesn’t apply
There are situations where you can’ t use the master theorem. For example,
it can be that the watershed function and the driving function cannot be
asymptotically compared. W e might have that 
  for an infinite
number of values of n  but also that 
  for an infinite number of
dif ferent values of n . As a practical matter , however , most of the driving
functions that arise in the study of algorithms can be meaningfully
compared with the watershed function. If you encounter a master recurrence
for which that’ s not the case, you’ll have to resort to substitution or other
methods.
Page number: 143
Even when the relative growths of the driving and watershed functions
can be compared, the master theorem does not cover all the possibilities.
There is a gap between cases 1 and 2 when 
 , yet the
watershed function does not grow polynomially faster than the driving
function. Similarly , there is a gap between cases 2 and 3 when 
 and the driving function grows more than
polylogarithmically faster than the watershed function, but it does not grow
polynomially faster . If the driving function falls into one of these gaps, or if
the regularity condition in case 3 fails to hold, you’ll need to use something
other than the master method to solve the recurrence.
As an example of a driving function falling into a gap, consider the
recurrence T  ( n ) = 2 T  ( n /2) + n /lg n . Since a  = 2 and b  = 2, the watershed
function is 
 . The driving function is n /lg n  = o ( n ),
which means that it grows asymptotically more slowly than the watershed
function n . But n /lg n  grows only logarithmically  slower than n , not
polynomially  slower . More precisely , equation (3.24) on page 67 says that
lg n  = o ( nϵ) for any constant ϵ  > 0, which means that 1/lg n  = ω ( n– ϵ) and 
. Thus no constant ϵ  > 0 exists such that 
, which is required for case 1 to apply . Case 2 fails to
apply as well, since 
 , where k  = –1, but k  must be
nonnegative for case 2 to apply .
T o solve this kind of recurrence, you must use another method, such as
the substitution method ( Section 4.3 ) or the Akra-Bazzi method ( Section
4.7 ). (Exercise 4.6-3 asks you to show that the answer is Θ( n  lg lg n ).)
Although the master theorem doesn’ t handle this particular recurrence, it
does handle the overwhelming majority of recurrences that tend to arise in
practice.
Exer cises
4.5-1
Use the master method to give tight asymptotic bounds for the following
recurrences.
a.  T  ( n ) = 2 T  ( n /4) + 1.
b.  T  ( n ) = 2 T  ( n /4) + 
 .
Page number: 144
c.  T  ( n ) = 2 T  ( n /4) + 
 .
d.  T  ( n ) = 2 T  ( n /4) + n .
e.  T  ( n ) = 2 T  ( n /4) + n2.
4.5-2
Professor Caesar wants to develop a matrix-multiplication algorithm that is
asymptotically faster than Strassen’ s algorithm. His algorithm will use the
divide-and-conquer method, dividing each matrix into n /4 × n /4
submatrices, and the divide and combine steps together will take Θ( n2)
time. Suppose that the professor ’ s algorithm creates a  recursive
subproblems of size n /4. What is the lar gest integer value of a  for which his
algorithm could possibly run asymptotically faster than Strassen’ s?
4.5-3
Use the master method to show that the solution to the binary-search
recurrence T  ( n ) = T  ( n /2) + Θ(1) is T  ( n ) = Θ(lg n ). (See Exercise 2.3-6 for
a description of binary search.)
4.5-4
Consider the function f  ( n ) = lg n . Ar gue that although f  ( n /2) < f  ( n ), the
regularity condition af  ( n / b ) ≤ cf  ( n ) with a  = 1 and b  = 2 does not hold for
any constant c  < 1. Ar gue further that for any ϵ  > 0, the condition in case 3
that 
  does not hold.
4.5-5
Show that for suitable constants a , b , and ϵ , the function f  ( n ) = 2⌈ lg n ⌉
satisfies all the conditions in case 3 of the master theorem except the
regularity condition.
★  4.6      Pr oof of the continuous master theor em
Proving the master theorem (Theorem 4.1) in its full generality , especially
dealing with the knotty technical issue of floors and ceilings, is beyond the
scope of this book. This section, however , states and proves a variant of the
master theorem, called the continuous master theorem1 in which the
master recurrence (4.17) is defined over suf ficiently lar ge positive real
Page number: 145
numbers. The proof of this version, uncomplicated by floors and ceilings,
contains the main ideas needed to understand how master recurrences
behave. Section 4.7  discusses floors and ceilings in divide-and-conquer
recurrences at greater length, presenting suf ficient conditions for them not
to af fect the asymptotic solutions.
Of course, since you need not understand the proof of the master
theorem in order to apply the master method, you may choose to skip this
section. But if you wish to study more-advanced algorithms beyond the
scope of this textbook, you may appreciate a better understanding of the
underlying mathematics, which the proof of the continuous master theorem
provides.
Although we usually assume that recurrences are algorithmic and don’ t
require an explicit statement of a base case, we must be much more careful
for proofs that justify the practice. The lemmas and theorem in this section
explicitly state the base cases, because the inductive proofs require
mathematical grounding. It is common in the world of mathematics to be
extraordinarily careful proving theorems that justify acting more casually in
practice.
The proof of the continuous master theorem involves two lemmas.
Lemma 4.2 uses a slightly simplified master recurrence with a threshold
constant of n0  = 1, rather than the more general n0  > 0 threshold constant
implied by the unstated base case. The lemma employs a recursion tree to
reduce the solution of the simplified master recurrence to that of evaluating
a summation. Lemma 4.3 then provides asymptotic bounds for the
summation, mirroring the three cases of the master theorem. Finally , the
continuous master theorem itself (Theorem 4.4) gives asymptotic bounds
for master recurrences, while generalizing to an arbitrary threshold constant
n0  > 0 as implied by the unstated base case.
Some of the proofs use the properties described in Problem 3-5 on pages
72–73 to combine and simplify complicated asymptotic expressions.
Although Problem 3-5 addresses only Θ-notation, the properties
enumerated there can be extended to O -notation and Ω-notation as well.
Here’ s the first lemma.
Lemma 4.2
Let a  > 0 and b  > 1 be constants, and let f  ( n ) be a function defined over real
numbers n  ≥ 1. Then the recurrence
Page number: 146
has solution
Proof    Consider the recursion tree in Figure 4.3 . Let’ s look first at its
internal nodes. The root of the tree has cost f  ( n ), and it has a  children, each
with cost f  ( n / b ). (It is convenient to think of a  as being an integer ,
especially when visualizing the recursion tree, but the mathematics does not
require it.) Each of these children has a  children, making a2 nodes at depth
2, and each of the a  children has cost f  ( n / b2). In general, there are aj nodes
at depth j , and each node has cost f  ( n / bj).
Now , let’ s move on to understanding the leaves. The tree grows
downward until n / bj becomes less than 1. Thus, the tree has height ⌊ logb  n ⌋
+ 1, because 
  and 
 .
Since, as we have observed, the number of nodes at depth j  is aj and all the
leaves are at depth ⌊ logb  n ⌋  + 1, the tree contains 
  leaves. Using the
identity (3.21) on page 66, we have 
, since a  is constant, and 
. Consequently , the total number of
leaves is 
 —asymptotically , the watershed function.
W e are now in a position to derive equation (4.18) by summing the costs
of the nodes at each depth in the tree, as shown in the figure. The first term
in the equation is the total costs of the leaves. Since each leaf is at depth
⌊ logb n ⌋  + 1 and 
 , the base case of the recurrence gives the
cost of a leaf: 
 . Hence the cost of all 
  leaves is 
 by Problem 3-5(d). The second term in equation
(4.18) is the cost of the internal nodes, which, in the underlying divide-and-
conquer algorithm, represents the costs of dividing problems into
subproblems and then recombining the subproblems. Since the cost for all
the internal nodes at depth j  is aj f  ( n / bj), the total cost of all internal nodes
is
Page number: 147
▪
Figur e 4.3  The recursion tree generated by T  ( n ) = aT  ( n / b ) + f  ( n ). The tree is a complete a -ary tree
with 
  leaves and height ⌊ log b  n ⌋  + 1. The cost of the nodes at each depth is shown at the
right, and their sum is given in equation (4.18).
As we’ll see, the three cases of the master theorem depend on the
distribution of the total cost across levels of the recursion tree:
Case 1:  The costs increase geometrically from the root to the leaves,
growing by a constant factor with each level.
Case 2:  The costs depend on the value of k  in the theorem. W ith k  = 0, the
costs are equal for each level; with k  = 1, the costs grow linearly from the
root to the leaves; with k  = 2, the growth is quadratic; and in general, the
costs grow polynomially in k .
Case 3:  The costs decrease geometrically from the root to the leaves,
shrinking by a constant factor with each level.
Page number: 148
The summation in equation (4.18) describes the cost of the dividing and
combining steps in the underlying divide-and-conquer algorithm. The next
lemma provides asymptotic bounds on the summation’ s growth.
Lemma 4.3
Let a  > 0 and b  > 1 be constants, and let f  ( n ) be a function defined over real
numbers n  ≥ 1. Then the asymptotic behavior of the function
defined for n  ≥ 1, can be characterized as follows:
1 . If there exists a constant ϵ  > 0 such that 
 , then 
.
2 . If there exists a constant k  ≥ 0 such that 
 , then 
.
3 . If there exists a constant c  in the range 0 < c  < 1 such that 0 < af
( n / b ) ≤ cf  ( n ) for all n  ≥ 1, then g ( n ) = Θ( f  ( n )).
Proof    For case 1, we have 
 , which implies that 
. Substituting into equation (4.19) yields

Page number: 149
the last series being geometric. Since b  and ϵ  are constants, the bϵ – 1
denominator doesn’ t af fect the asymptotic growth of g ( n ), and neither does
the –1 in the numerator . Since 
 , we
obtain 
 , thereby proving case 1.
Case 2 assumes that 
 , from which we can conclude
that 
 . Substituting into equation (4.19) and
repeatedly applying Problem 3-5(c) yields
The summation within the Θ-notation can be bounded from above as
follows:
Page number: 150
Exercise 4.6-1 asks you to show that the summation can similarly be
bounded from below by 
 . Since we have tight upper and lower
bounds, the summation is 
 , from which we can conclude that 
, thereby completing the proof of case 2.
For case 3, observe that f  ( n ) appears in the definition (4.19) of g ( n )
(when j  = 0) and that all terms of g ( n ) are positive. Therefore, we must have
g ( n ) = Ω( f  ( n )), and it only remains to prove that g ( n ) = O ( f  ( n )). Performing
j  iterations of the inequality af  ( n / b ) ≤ cf  ( n ) yields aj f  ( n / bj) ≤ cj f  ( n ).
Substituting into equation (4.19), we obtain
Thus, we can conclude that g ( n ) = Θ( f  ( n )). W ith case 3 proved, the entire
proof of the lemma is complete.
▪
W e can now state and prove the continuous master theorem.
Theorem 4.4 (Continuous master theorem)
Page number: 151
Let a  > 0 and b  > 1 be constants, and let f  ( n ) be a driving function that is
defined and nonnegative on all suf ficiently lar ge reals. Define the
algorithmic recurrence T  ( n ) on the positive real numbers by
T  ( n ) = aT  ( n / b ) + f  ( n ).
Then the asymptotic behavior of T  ( n ) can be characterized as follows:
1 . If there exists a constant ϵ  > 0 such that 
 , then 
.
2 . If there exists a constant k  ≥ 0 such that 
 , then 
.
3 . If there exists a constant ϵ  > 0 such that 
 , and if f
( n ) additionally satisfies the regularity condition af  ( n / b ) ≤ cf  ( n ) for
some constant c  < 1 and all suf ficiently lar ge n , then T  ( n ) = Θ( f
( n )).
Proof    The idea is to bound the summation (4.18) from Lemma 4.2 by
applying Lemma 4.3. But we must account for Lemma 4.2 using a base
case for 0 < n  < 1, whereas this theorem uses an implicit base case for 0 < n
< n0 , where n0  > 0 is an arbitrary threshold constant. Since the recurrence is
algorithmic, we can assume that f  ( n ) is defined for n  ≥ n0 .
For n  > 0, let us define two auxiliary functions T′( n ) = T  ( n0  n ) and f  ′( n )
= f  ( n0  n ). W e have
W e have obtained a recurrence for T  ′( n ) that satisfies the conditions of
Lemma 4.2, and by that lemma, the solution is

Page number: 152
T o solve T  ′( n ), we first need to bound f  ′( n ). Let’ s examine the individual
cases in the theorem.
The condition for case 1 is 
  for some constant ϵ  > 0.
W e have
since a , b , n0 , and ϵ  are all constant. The function f  ′( n ) satisfies the
conditions of case 1 of Lemma 4.3, and the summation in equation (4.18) of
Lemma 4.2 evaluates to 
 . Because a , b  and n0  are all constants, we
have
thereby completing case 1 of the theorem.
The condition for case 2 is 
  for some constant k  ≥ 0.
W e have
Similar to the proof of case 1, the function f′( n ) satisfies the conditions of
case 2 of Lemma 4.3. The summation in equation (4.18) of Lemma 4.2 is
therefore 
 , which implies that
which proves case 2 of the theorem.
Finally , the condition for case 3 is 
  for some constant ϵ
> 0 and f  ( n ) additionally satisfies the regularity condition af  ( n / b ) ≤ cf  ( n )
Page number: 153
for all n  ≥ n0  and some constants c  < 1 and n0  > 1. The first part of case 3 is
like case 1:
Using the definition of f  ′( n ) and the fact that n0  n  ≥ n0  for all n  ≥ 1, we have
for n  ≥ 1 that
af  ′( n / b ) = af  ( n 0  n / b )
≤ cf  ( n 0  n )
= cf  ′( n ).
Thus f  ′( n ) satisfies the requirements for case 3 of Lemma 4.3, and the
summation in equation (4.18) of Lemma 4.2 evaluates to Θ( f  ′( n )), yielding
T  ( n )= T  ′( n / n 0 )
=
= Θ( f  ′( n / n 0 ))
= Θ( f  ( n )),
which completes the proof of case 3 of the theorem and thus the whole
theorem.
▪
Exer cises
4.6-1
Show that 
 .
★  4.6-2
Show that case 3 of the master theorem is overstated (which is also why
case 3 of Lemma 4.3 does not require that 
  in the sense
that the regularity condition af  ( n / b ) ≤ cf  ( n ) for some constant c  < 1 implies
that there exists a constant ϵ  > 0 such that 
 .
★  4.6-3
Page number: 154
For 
 , prove that the summation in equation (4.19) has
solution 
 . Conclude that a master recurrence T  ( n )
using f  ( n ) as its driving function has solution 
 .
★  4.7      Akra-Bazzi r ecurr ences
This section provides an overview of two advanced topics related to divide-
and-conquer recurrences. The first deals with technicalities arising from the
use of floors and ceilings, and the second discusses the Akra-Bazzi method,
which involves a little calculus, for solving complicated divide-and-conquer
recurrences.
In particular , we’ll look at the class of algorithmic divide-and-conquer
recurrences originally studied by M. Akra and L. Bazzi [ 13 ]. These Akra-
Bazzi  recurrences take the form
where k  is a positive integer; all the constants a1 , a2 , … , ak  ∈  R  are strictly
positive; all the constants b1 , b2 , … , bk  ∈  R  are strictly greater than 1; and
the driving function f  ( n ) is defined on suf ficiently lar ge nonnegative reals
and is itself nonnegative.
Akra-Bazzi recurrences generalize the class of recurrences addressed by
the master theorem. Whereas master recurrences characterize the running
times of divide-and-conquer algorithms that break a problem into equal-
sized subproblems (modulo floors and ceilings), Akra-Bazzi recurrences
can describe the running time of divide-and-conquer algorithms that break a
problem into dif ferent-sized subproblems. The master theorem, however ,
allows you to ignore floors and ceilings, but the Akra-Bazzi method for
solving Akra-Bazzi recurrences needs an additional requirement to deal
with floors and ceilings.
But before diving into the Akra-Bazzi method itself, let’ s understand the
limitations involved in ignoring floors and ceilings in Akra-Bazzi
recurrences. As you’re aware, algorithms generally deal with integer -sized
inputs. The mathematics for recurrences is often easier with real numbers,
however , than with integers, where we must cope with floors and ceilings to
ensure that terms are well defined. The dif ference may not seem to be much
Page number: 155
—especially because that’ s often the truth with recurrences—but to be
mathematically correct, we must be careful with our assumptions. Since our
end goal is to understand algorithms and not the vagaries of mathematical
corner cases, we’d like to be casual yet rigorous. How can we treat floors
and ceilings casually while still ensuring rigor?
From a mathematical point of view , the dif ficulty in dealing with floors
and ceilings is that some driving functions can be really , really weird. So
it’ s not okay in general to ignore floors and ceilings in Akra-Bazzi
recurrences. Fortunately , most of the driving functions we encounter in the
study of algorithms behave nicely , and floors and ceilings don’ t make a
dif ference.
The polynomial-gr owth condition
If the driving function f  ( n ) in equation (4.22) is well behaved in the
following sense, it’ s okay to drop floors and ceilings.
A function f  ( n ) defined on all suf ficiently lar ge positive reals
satisfies the polynomial-growth condition  if there exists a constant
 such that the following holds: for every constant ϕ  ≥ 1, there
exists a constant d  > 1 (depending on ϕ ) such that f  ( n )/ d  ≤ f  ( ψ n )
≤ df  ( n ) for all 1 ≤ ψ  ≤ ϕ  and 
 .
This definition may be one of the hardest in this textbook to get your head
around. T o a first order , it says that f  ( n ) satisfies the property that f  (Θ( n )) =
Θ( f  ( n )), although the polynomial-growth condition is actually somewhat
stronger (see Exercise 4.7-4). The definition also implies that f  ( n ) is
asymptotically positive (see Exercise 4.7-3).
Examples of functions that satisfy the polynomial-growth condition
include any function of the form f  ( n ) = Θ( nα lgβ n  lg lgγn ), where α , β , and
γ  are constants. Most of the polynomially bounded functions used in this
book satisfy the condition. Exponentials and superexponentials do not (see
Exercise 4.7-2, for example), and there also exist polynomially bounded
functions that do not.
Floors and ceilings in “nice” r ecurr ences
When the driving function in an Akra-Bazzi recurrence satisfies the
polynomial-growth condition, floors and ceilings don’ t change the
Page number: 156
asymptotic behavior of the solution. The following theorem, which is
presented without proof, formalizes this notion.
Theorem 4.5
Let T  ( n ) be a function defined on the nonnegative reals that satisfies
recurrence (4.22), where f  ( n ) satisfies the polynomial-growth condition.
Let T  ′( n ) be another function defined on the natural numbers also satisfying
recurrence (4.22), except that each T  ( n / bi ) is replaced either with T  ( ⌈ n / bi ⌉ )
or with T  ( ⌊ n / bi ⌋ ). Then we have T  ′( n ) = Θ( T  ( n )).
▪
Floors and ceilings represent a minor perturbation to the ar guments in
the recursion. By inequality (3.2) on page 64, they perturb an ar gument by
at most 1. But much lar ger perturbations are tolerable. As long as the
driving function f  ( n ) in recurrence (4.22) satisfies the polynomial-growth
condition, it turns out that replacing any term T  ( n / bi ) with T  ( n / bi  + hi ( n )),
where | hi ( n )| = O ( n /lg1+ ϵ n ) for some constant ϵ  > 0 and suf ficiently lar ge n ,
leaves the asymptotic solution unaf fected. Thus, the divide step in a divide-
and-conquer algorithm can be moderately coarse without af fecting the
solution to its running-time recurrence.
The Akra-Bazzi method
The Akra-Bazzi method, not surprisingly , was developed to solve Akra-
Bazzi recurrences (4.22), which by dint of Theorem 4.5, applies in the
presence of floors and ceilings or even lar ger perturbations, as just
discussed. The method involves first determining the unique real number p
such that 
 . Such a p  always exists, because when p  → –∞,
the sum goes to ∞; it decreases as p  increases; and when p  → ∞, it goes to
0. The Akra-Bazzi method then gives the solution to the recurrence as
As an example, consider the recurrence

Page number: 157
W e’ll see the similar recurrence (9.1) on page 240 when we study an
algorithm for selecting the i th smallest element from a set of n  numbers.
This recurrence has the form of equation (4.22), where a1  = a2  = 1, b1  = 5,
b2  = 10/7, and f  ( n ) = n . T o solve it, the Akra-Bazzi method says that we
should determine the unique p  satisfying
Solving for p  is kind of messy—it turns out that p  = 0.83978 …—but we
can solve the recurrence without actually knowing the exact value for p .
Observe that (1/5)0 + (7/10)0 = 2 and (1/5)1 + (7/10)1 = 9/10, and thus p  lies
in the range 0 < p  < 1. That turns out to be suf ficient for the Akra-Bazzi
method to give us the solution. W e’ll use the fact from calculus that if k  ≠ –
1, then ∫ xkdx  = xk  + 1/( k  + 1), which we’ll apply with k  = – p  ≠ –1. The
Akra-Bazzi solution (4.23) gives us
Although the Akra-Bazzi method is more general than the master
theorem, it requires calculus and sometimes a bit more reasoning. Y ou also
must ensure that your driving function satisfies the polynomial-growth
condition if you want to ignore floors and ceilings, although that’ s rarely a
problem. When it applies, the master method is much simpler to use, but
only when subproblem sizes are more or less equal. They are both good
tools for your algorithmic toolkit.
Exer cises
Page number: 158
★  4.7-1
Consider an Akra-Bazzi recurrence T  ( n ) on the reals as given in recurrence
(4.22), and define T  ′( n ) as
where c  > 0 is constant. Prove that whatever the implicit initial conditions
for T  ( n ) might be, there exist initial conditions for T  ′( n ) such that T  ′( n ) =
cT  ( n ) for all n  > 0. Conclude that we can drop the asymptotics on a driving
function in any Akra-Bazzi recurrence without af fecting its asymptotic
solution.
4.7-2
Show that f  ( n ) = n2 satisfies the polynomial-growth condition but that f  ( n )
= 2n does not.
4.7-3
Let f  ( n ) be a function that satisfies the polynomial-growth condition. Prove
that f  ( n ) is asymptotically positive, that is, there exists a constant n0  ≥ 0
such that f  ( n ) ≥ 0 for all n  ≥ n0 .
★  4.7-4
Give an example of a function f  ( n ) that does not satisfy the polynomial-
growth condition but for which f  (Θ( n )) = Θ( f  ( n )).
4.7-5
Use the Akra-Bazzi method to solve the following recurrences.
a.  T  ( n ) = T  ( n /2) + T  ( n /3) + T  ( n /6) + n  lg n .
b.  T  ( n ) = 3 T  ( n /3) + 8 T  ( n /4) + n2/lg n .
c.  T  ( n ) = (2/3) T  ( n /3) + (1/3) T  (2 n /3) + lg n .
d.  T  ( n ) = (1/3) T  ( n /3) + 1/ n .
e.  T  ( n ) = 3 T  ( n /3) + 3 T  (2 n /3) + n2.
★  4.7-6
Use the Akra-Bazzi method to prove the continuous master theorem.
Page number: 159
Pr oblems
4-1     Recurrence examples
Give asymptotically tight upper and lower bounds for T  ( n ) in each of the
following algorithmic recurrences. Justify your answers.
a.  T  ( n ) = 2 T  ( n /2) + n3.
b.  T  ( n ) = T  (8 n /1 1) + n .
c.  T  ( n ) = 16 T  ( n /4) + n2.
d.  T  ( n ) = 4 T  ( n /2) + n2 lg n .
e.  T  ( n ) = 8 T  ( n /3) + n2.
f.  T  ( n ) = 7 T  ( n /2) + n2 lg n .
g.  
 .
h.  T  ( n ) = T  ( n  –2) + n2.
4-2     Parameter-passing costs
Throughout this book, we assume that parameter passing during procedure
calls takes constant time, even if an N -element array is being passed. This
assumption is valid in most systems because a pointer to the array is passed,
not the array itself. This problem examines the implications of three
parameter -passing strategies:
1 . Arrays are passed by pointer . T ime = Θ(1).
2 . Arrays are passed by copying. T ime = Θ( N ), where N  is the size of
the array .
3 . Arrays are passed by copying only the subrange that might be
accessed by the called procedure. T ime = Θ( n ) if the subarray
contains n  elements.
Consider the following three algorithms:
a.  The recursive binary-search algorithm for finding a number in a sorted
array (see Exercise 2.3-6).
b.  The M ERGE -S OR T  procedure from Section 2.3.1 .
Page number: 160
c.  The M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y -R ECURSIVE  procedure from Section 4.1 .
Give nine recurrences Ta 1 ( N, n ), Ta 2 ( N, n ), … , Tc 3 ( N, n ) for the worst-case
running times of each of the three algorithms above when arrays and
matrices are passed using each of the three parameter -passing strategies
above. Solve your recurrences, giving tight asymptotic bounds.
4-3     Solving recurrences with a change of variables
Sometimes, a little algebraic manipulation can make an unknown
recurrence similar to one you have seen before. Let’ s solve the recurrence
by using the change-of-variables method.
a.  Define m  = lg n  and S ( m ) = T  (2m). Rewrite recurrence (4.25) in terms of
m  and S ( m ).
b.  Solve your recurrence for S ( m ).
c.  Use your solution for S ( m ) to conclude that T  ( n ) = Θ(lg n  lg lg n ).
d.  Sketch the recursion tree for recurrence (4.25), and use it to explain
intuitively why the solution is T  ( n ) = Θ(lg n  lg lg n ).
Solve the following recurrences by changing variables:
e.  
 .
f.  
 .
4-4     More recurrence examples
Give asymptotically tight upper and lower bounds for T  ( n ) in each of the
following recurrences. Justify your answers.
a.  T  ( n ) = 5 T  ( n /3) + n  lg n .
b.  T  ( n ) = 3 T  ( n /3) + n /lg n .
c.  
 .
d.  T  ( n ) = 2 T  ( n /2 –2) + n /2.
e.  T  ( n ) = 2 T  ( n /2) + n /lg n .
Page number: 161
f.  T  ( n ) = T  ( n /2) + T  ( n /4) + T  ( n /8) + n .
g.  T  ( n ) = T  ( n  – 1) + 1/ n .
h.  T  ( n ) = T  ( n  – 1) + lg n .
i.  T  ( n ) = T  ( n  – 2) + 1/lg n .
j.  
 .
4-5     Fibonacci numbers
This problem develops properties of the Fibonacci numbers, which are
defined by recurrence (3.31) on page 69. W e’ll explore the technique of
generating functions to solve the Fibonacci recurrence. Define the
generating function  (or formal power series ) F  as
where Fi  is the i th Fibonacci number .
a.  Show that F  ( z ) = z  + z F  ( z ) + z2F  ( z ).
b.  Show that
where ϕ  is the golden ratio, and 
  is its conjugate (see page 69).
c.  Show that
Y ou may use without proof the generating-function version of equation
(A.7) on page 1 142, 
 . Because this equation involves a
generating function, x  is a formal variable, not a real-valued variable, so
that you don’ t have to worry about conver gence of the summation or
Page number: 162
about the requirement in equation (A.7) that | x | < 1, which doesn’ t make
sense here.
d.  Use part (c) to prove that 
  for i  > 0, rounded to the nearest
integer . ( Hint:  Observe that 
 .)
e.  Prove that Fi +2  ≥ ϕi for i  ≥ 0.
4-6     Chip testing
Professor Diogenes has n  supposedly identical integrated-circuit chips that
in principle are capable of testing each other . The professor ’ s test jig
accommodates two chips at a time. When the jig is loaded, each chip tests
the other and reports whether it is good or bad. A good chip always reports
accurately whether the other chip is good or bad, but the professor cannot
trust the answer of a bad chip. Thus, the four possible outcomes of a test are
as follows:
Chip A  says Chip B  says Conclusion
B  is good A  is good both are good, or both are bad
B  is good A  is bad at least one is bad
B  is bad A  is good at least one is bad
B  is bad A  is bad at least one is bad
a.  Show that if at least n /2 chips are bad, the professor cannot necessarily
determine which chips are good using any strategy based on this kind of
pairwise test. Assume that the bad chips can conspire to fool the
professor .
Now you will design an algorithm to identify which chips are good and
which are bad, assuming that more than n /2 of the chips are good. First, you
will determine how to identify one good chip.
b.  Show that ⌊ n /2 ⌋  pairwise tests are suf ficient to reduce the problem to one
of nearly half the size. That is, show how to use ⌊ n /2 ⌋  pairwise tests to
obtain a set with at most ⌈ n /2 ⌉  chips that still has the property that more
than half of the chips are good.
c.  Show how to apply the solution to part (b) recursively to identify one
good chip. Give and solve the recurrence that describes the number of
tests needed to identify one good chip.
Page number: 163
Y ou have now determined how to identify one good chip.
d.  Show how to identify all the good chips with an additional Θ( n ) pairwise
tests.
4-7     Monge arrays
An m  × n  array A  of real numbers is a Monge array  if for all i , j , k , and l
such that 1 ≤ i  < k  ≤ m  and 1 ≤ j  < l  ≤ n , we have
A [ i , j ] + A [ k, l ] ≤ A [ i, l ] + A [ k , j ].
In other words, whenever we pick two rows and two columns of a Monge
array and consider the four elements at the intersections of the rows and the
columns, the sum of the upper -left and lower -right elements is less than or
equal to the sum of the lower -left and upper -right elements. For example,
the following array is Monge:
10 17 13 28 23
17 22 16 29 23
24 28 22 34 24
1 1 13 6 17 7
45 44 32 37 23
36 33 19 21 6
75 66 51 53 34
a.  Prove that an array is Monge if and only if for all i  = 1, 2, …, m  – 1 and j
= 1, 2, …, n  – 1, we have
A [ i , j ] + A [ i  + 1, j  + 1] ≤ A [ i , j  + 1] + A [ i  + 1, j ].
( Hint:  For the “if” part, use induction separately on rows and columns.)
b.  The following array is not Monge. Change one element in order to make
it Monge. ( Hint:  Use part (a).)
37 23 22 32
21 6 7 10
53 34 30 31
32 13 9 6
43 21 15 8
c.  Let f  ( i ) be the index of the column containing the leftmost minimum
element of row i . Prove that f  (1) ≤ f  (2) ≤ ⋯  ≤ f  ( m ) for any m  × n  Monge
array .
Page number: 164
d.  Here is a description of a divide-and-conquer algorithm that computes
the leftmost minimum element in each row of an m  × n  Monge array A :
Construct a submatrix A′ of A  consisting of the even-numbered
rows of A . Recursively determine the leftmost minimum for each
row of A′. Then compute the leftmost minimum in the odd-
numbered rows of A .
Explain how to compute the leftmost minimum in the odd-numbered rows
of A  (given that the leftmost minimum of the even-numbered rows is
known) in O ( m  + n ) time.
e.  W rite the recurrence for the running time of the algorithm in part (d).
Show that its solution is O ( m  + n  log m ).
Chapter notes
Divide-and-conquer as a technique for designing algorithms dates back at
least to 1962 in an article by Karatsuba and Ofman [ 242 ], but it might have
been used well before then. According to Heideman, Johnson, and Burrus
[ 21 1 ], C. F . Gauss devised the first fast Fourier transform algorithm in
1805, and Gauss’ s formulation breaks the problem into smaller
subproblems whose solutions are combined.
Strassen’ s algorithm [ 424 ] caused much excitement when it appeared in
1969. Before then, few imagined the possibility of an algorithm
asymptotically faster than the basic M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y  procedure. Shortly
thereafter , S. W inograd reduced the number of submatrix additions from 18
to 15 while still using seven submatrix multiplications. This improvement,
which W inograd apparently never published (and which is frequently
miscited in the literature), may enhance the practicality of the method, but it
does not af fect its asymptotic performance. Probert [ 368 ] described
W inograd’ s algorithm and showed that with seven multiplications, 15
additions is the minimum possible.
Strassen’ s Θ( nlg 7) = O ( n2.81) bound for matrix multiplication held until
1987, when Coppersmith and W inograd [ 103 ] made a significant advance,
improving the bound to O ( n2.376) time with a mathematically sophisticated
but wildly impractical algorithm based on tensor products. It took
Page number: 165
approximately 25 years before the asymptotic upper bound was again
improved. In 2012 V assilevska W illiams [ 445 ] improved it to O ( n2.37287),
and two years later Le Gall [ 278 ] achieved O ( n2.37286), both of them using
mathematically fascinating but impractical algorithms. The best lower
bound to date is just the obvious Ω( n2) bound (obvious because any
algorithm for matrix multiplication must fill in the n2 elements of the
product matrix).
The performance of M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y -R ECURSIVE  can be improved in
practice by coarsening the leaves of the recursion. It also exhibits better
cache behavior than M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y , although M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y  can be
improved by “tiling.” Leiserson et al. [ 293 ] conducted a performance-
engineering study of matrix multiplication in which a parallel and
vectorized divide-and-conquer algorithm achieved the highest performance.
Strassen’ s algorithm can be practical for lar ge dense matrices, although
lar ge matrices tend to be sparse, and sparse methods can be much faster .
When using limited-precision floating-point values, Strassen’ s algorithm
produces lar ger numerical errors than the Θ( n3) algorithms do, although
Higham [ 215 ] demonstrated that Strassen’ s algorithm is amply accurate for
some applications.
Recurrences were studied as early as 1202 by Leonardo Bonacci [ 66 ],
also known as Fibonacci, for whom the Fibonacci numbers are named,
although Indian mathematicians had discovered Fibonacci numbers
centuries before. The French mathematician De Moivre [ 108 ] introduced
the method of generating functions with which he studied Fibonacci
numbers (see Problem 4-5). Knuth [ 259 ] and Liu [ 302 ] are good resources
for learning the method of generating functions.
Aho, Hopcroft, and Ullman [ 5 , 6 ] of fered one of the first general
methods for solving recurrences arising from the analysis of divide-and-
conquer algorithms. The master method was adapted from Bentley , Haken,
and Saxe [ 52 ]. The Akra-Bazzi method is due (unsurprisingly) to Akra and
Bazzi [ 13 ]. Divide-and-conquer recurrences have been studied by many
researchers, including Campbell [ 79 ], Graham, Knuth, and Patashnik [ 199 ],
Kuszmaul and Leiserson [ 274 ], Leighton [ 287 ], Purdom and Brown [ 371 ],
Roura [ 389 ], V erma [ 447 ], and Y ap [ 462 ].
The issue of floors and ceilings in divide-and-conquer recurrences,
including a theorem similar to Theorem 4.5, was studied by Leighton [ 287 ].
Leighton proposed a version of the polynomial-growth condition. Campbell
Page number: 166
[ 79 ] removed several limitations in Leighton’ s statement of it and showed
that there were polynomially bounded functions that do not satisfy
Leighton’ s condition. Campbell also carefully studied many other technical
issues, including the well-definedness of divide-and-conquer recurrences.
Kuszmaul and Leiserson [ 274 ] provided a proof of Theorem 4.5 that does
not involve calculus or other higher math. Both Campbell and Leighton
explored the perturbations of ar guments beyond simple floors and ceilings.
1 This terminology does not mean that either T  ( n ) or f  ( n ) need be continuous, only that the domain
of T  ( n ) is the real numbers, as opposed to integers.
Page number: 167
5          Pr obabilistic Analysis and Randomized Algorithms
This chapter introduces probabilistic analysis and randomized algorithms. If
you are unfamiliar with the basics of probability theory , you should read
Sections C.1 – C.4  of Appendix C , which review this material. W e’ll revisit
probabilistic analysis and randomized algorithms several times throughout
this book.
5.1      The hiring pr oblem
Suppose that you need to hire a new of fice assistant. Y our previous attempts
at hiring have been unsuccessful, and you decide to use an employment
agency . The employment agency sends you one candidate each day . Y ou
interview that person and then decide either to hire that person or not. Y ou
must pay the employment agency a small fee to interview an applicant. T o
actually hire an applicant is more costly , however , since you must fire your
current of fice assistant and also pay a substantial hiring fee to the
employment agency . Y ou are committed to having, at all times, the best
possible person for the job. Therefore, you decide that, after interviewing
each applicant, if that applicant is better qualified than the current of fice
assistant, you will fire the current of fice assistant and hire the new
applicant. Y ou are willing to pay the resulting price of this strategy , but you
wish to estimate what that price will be.
The procedure H IRE -A SSIST ANT  on the facing page expresses this
strategy for hiring in pseudocode. The candidates for the of fice assistant job
are numbered 1 through n  and interviewed in that order . The procedure
assumes that after interviewing candidate i , you can determine whether
candidate i  is the best candidate you have seen so far . It starts by creating a
Page number: 168
dummy candidate, numbered 0, who is less qualified than each of the other
candidates.
The cost model for this problem dif fers from the model described in
Chapter 2 . W e focus not on the running time of H IRE -A SSIST ANT , but instead
on the fees paid for interviewing and hiring. On the surface, analyzing the
cost of this algorithm may seem very dif ferent from analyzing the running
time of, say , mer ge sort. The analytical techniques used, however , are
identical whether we are analyzing cost or running time. In either case, we
are counting the number of times certain basic operations are executed.
H IRE -A SSIST ANT ( n )
1 best  = 0 //  candidate 0 is a least-qualified dummy candidate
2 for  i  = 1 to  n
3 interview candidate i
4 if  candidate i  is better than candidate best
5 best  = i
6 hire candidate i
Interviewing has a low cost, say ci , whereas hiring is expensive, costing
ch . Letting m  be the number of people hired, the total cost associated with
this algorithm is O ( ci n  + ch m ). No matter how many people you hire, you
always interview n  candidates and thus always incur the cost ci n  associated
with interviewing. W e therefore concentrate on analyzing ch m , the hiring
cost. This quantity depends on the order in which you interview candidates.
This scenario serves as a model for a common computational paradigm.
Algorithms often need to find the maximum or minimum value in a
sequence by examining each element of the sequence and maintaining a
current “winner .” The hiring problem models how often a procedure
updates its notion of which element is currently winning.
W orst-case analysis
In the worst case, you actually hire every candidate that you interview . This
situation occurs if the candidates come in strictly increasing order of
quality , in which case you hire n  times, for a total hiring cost of O ( ch n ).
Of course, the candidates do not always come in increasing order of
quality . In fact, you have no idea about the order in which they arrive, nor
Page number: 169
do you have any control over this order . Therefore, it is natural to ask what
we expect to happen in a typical or average case.
Pr obabilistic analysis
Probabilistic analysis  is the use of probability in the analysis of problems.
Most commonly , we use probabilistic analysis to analyze the running time
of an algorithm. Sometimes we use it to analyze other quantities, such as
the hiring cost in procedure H IRE -A SSIST ANT . In order to perform a
probabilistic analysis, we must use knowledge of, or make assumptions
about, the distribution of the inputs. Then we analyze our algorithm,
computing an average-case running time, where we take the average, or
expected value, over the distribution of the possible inputs. When reporting
such a running time, we refer to it as the average-case running time .
Y ou must be careful in deciding on the distribution of inputs. For some
problems, you may reasonably assume something about the set of all
possible inputs, and then you can use probabilistic analysis as a technique
for designing an ef ficient algorithm and as a means for gaining insight into
a problem. For other problems, you cannot characterize a reasonable input
distribution, and in these cases you cannot use probabilistic analysis.
For the hiring problem, we can assume that the applicants come in a
random order . What does that mean for this problem? W e assume that you
can compare any two candidates and decide which one is better qualified,
which is to say that there is a total order on the candidates. (See Section B.2
for the definition of a total order .) Thus, you can rank each candidate with a
unique number from 1 through n , using rank ( i ) to denote the rank of
applicant i , and adopt the convention that a higher rank corresponds to a
better qualified applicant. The ordered list 〈 rank (1), rank (2), … , rank ( n )〉  is
a permutation of the list 〈 1, 2, … , n〉 . Saying that the applicants come in a
random order is equivalent to saying that this list of ranks is equally likely
to be any one of the n ! permutations of the numbers 1 through n .
Alternatively , we say that the ranks form a uniform random permutation ,
that is, each of the possible n ! permutations appears with equal probability .
Section 5.2  contains a probabilistic analysis of the hiring problem.
Randomized algorithms
Page number: 170
In order to use probabilistic analysis, you need to know something about the
distribution of the inputs. In many cases, you know little about the input
distribution. Even if you do know something about the distribution, you
might not be able to model this knowledge computationally . Y et, probability
and randomness often serve as tools for algorithm design and analysis, by
making part of the algorithm behave randomly .
In the hiring problem, it may seem as if the candidates are being
presented to you in a random order , but you have no way of knowing
whether they really are. Thus, in order to develop a randomized algorithm
for the hiring problem, you need greater control over the order in which
you’ll interview the candidates. W e will, therefore, change the model
slightly . The employment agency sends you a list of the n  candidates in
advance. On each day , you choose, randomly , which candidate to interview .
Although you know nothing about the candidates (besides their names), we
have made a significant change. Instead of accepting the order given to you
by the employment agency and hoping that it’ s random, you have instead
gained control of the process and enforced a random order .
More generally , we call an algorithm randomized  if its behavior is
determined not only by its input but also by values produced by a random-
number generator . W e assume that we have at our disposal a random-
number generator R ANDOM . A call to R ANDOM ( a , b ) returns an integer
between a  and b , inclusive, with each such integer being equally likely . For
example, R ANDOM (0, 1) produces 0 with probability 1/2, and it produces 1
with probability 1/2. A call to R ANDOM (3, 7) returns any one of 3, 4, 5, 6, or
7, each with probability 1/5. Each integer returned by R ANDOM  is
independent of the integers returned on previous calls. Y ou may imagine
R ANDOM  as rolling a ( b  – a  + 1)-sided die to obtain its output. (In practice,
most programming environments of fer a pseudorandom-number
generator : a deterministic algorithm returning numbers that “look”
statistically random.)
When analyzing the running time of a randomized algorithm, we take
the expectation of the running time over the distribution of values returned
by the random number generator . W e distinguish these algorithms from
those in which the input is random by referring to the running time of a
randomized algorithm as an expected running time . In general, we discuss
the average-case running time when the probability distribution is over the
Page number: 171
inputs to the algorithm, and we discuss the expected running time when the
algorithm itself makes random choices.
Exer cises
5.1-1
Show that the assumption that you are always able to determine which
candidate is best, in line 4 of procedure H IRE -A SSIST ANT , implies that you
know a total order on the ranks of the candidates.
★  5.1-2
Describe an implementation of the procedure R ANDOM ( a , b ) that makes
calls only to R ANDOM (0, 1). What is the expected running time of your
procedure, as a function of a  and b ?
★  5.1-3
Y ou wish to implement a program that outputs 0 with probability 1/2 and 1
with probability 1/2. At your disposal is a procedure B IASED -R ANDOM  that
outputs either 0 or 1, but it outputs 1 with some probability p  and 0 with
probability 1 – p , where 0 < p  < 1. Y ou do not know what p  is. Give an
algorithm that uses B IASED -R ANDOM  as a subroutine, and returns an
unbiased answer , returning 0 with probability 1/2 and 1 with probability
1/2. What is the expected running time of your algorithm as a function of p ?
5.2      Indicator random variables
In order to analyze many algorithms, including the hiring problem, we use
indicator random variables. Indicator random variables provide a
convenient method for converting between probabilities and expectations.
Given a sample space S  and an event A , the indicator random variable  I
{ A } associated with event A  is defined as
As a simple example, let us determine the expected number of heads
obtained when flipping a fair coin. The sample space for a single coin flip is
S  = { H , T }, with Pr { H } = Pr { T } = 1/2. W e can then define an indicator
Page number: 172
random variable XH , associated with the coin coming up heads, which is the
event H . This variable counts the number of heads obtained in this flip, and
it is 1 if the coin comes up heads and 0 otherwise. W e write
The expected number of heads obtained in one flip of the coin is simply the
expected value of our indicator variable XH :
E [ X H ] = E [I { H }]
= 1 · Pr { H } + 0 · Pr { T }
= 1 · (1/2) + 0 · (1/2)
= 1/2.
Thus the expected number of heads obtained by one flip of a fair coin is
1/2. As the following lemma shows, the expected value of an indicator
random variable associated with an event A  is equal to the probability that A
occurs.
Lemma 5.1
Given a sample space S  and an event A  in the sample space S , let XA  = I
{ A }. Then E [ XA ] = Pr { A }.
Proof    By the definition of an indicator random variable from equation
(5.1) and the definition of expected value, we have
E [ X A ] = E [I { A }]
= 1 · Pr { A } + 0 · Pr { A }
= Pr { A },
where A  denotes S  – A , the complement of A .
▪
Although indicator random variables may seem cumbersome for an
application such as counting the expected number of heads on a flip of a
single coin, they are useful for analyzing situations that perform repeated
random trials. In Appendix C , for example, indicator random variables
provide a simple way to determine the expected number of heads in n  coin
Page number: 173
flips. One option is to consider separately the probability of obtaining 0
heads, 1 head, 2 heads, etc. to arrive at the result of equation (C.41) on page
1 199. Alternatively , we can employ the simpler method proposed in
equation (C.42), which uses indicator random variables implicitly . Making
this ar gument more explicit, let Xi  be the indicator random variable
associated with the event in which the i th flip comes up heads: Xi  = I {the
i th flip results in the event H }. Let X  be the random variable denoting the
total number of heads in the n  coin flips, so that
In order to compute the expected number of heads, take the expectation of
both sides of the above equation to obtain
By Lemma 5.1, the expectation of each of the random variables is E [ Xi ] =
1/2 for i  = 1, 2, … , n . Then we can compute the sum of the expectations: 
. But equation (5.2) calls for the expectation of the sum,
not the sum of the expectations. How can we resolve this conundrum?
Linearity of expectation, equation (C.24) on page 1 192, to the rescue: the
expectation of the sum always equals the sum of the expectations . Linearity
of expectation applies even when there is dependence among the random
variables. Combining indicator random variables with linearity of
expectation gives us a powerful technique to compute expected values
when multiple events occur . W e now can compute the expected number of
heads:

Page number: 174
Thus, compared with the method used in equation (C.41), indicator random
variables greatly simplify the calculation. W e use indicator random
variables throughout this book.
Analysis of the hiring pr oblem using indicator random variables
Returning to the hiring problem, we now wish to compute the expected
number of times that you hire a new of fice assistant. In order to use a
probabilistic analysis, let’ s assume that the candidates arrive in a random
order , as discussed in Section 5.1 . (W e’ll see in Section 5.3  how to remove
this assumption.) Let X  be the random variable whose value equals the
number of times you hire a new of fice assistant. W e could then apply the
definition of expected value from equation (C.23) on page 1 192 to obtain
but this calculation would be cumbersome. Instead, let’ s simplify the
calculation by using indicator random variables.
T o use indicator random variables, instead of computing E [ X ] by
defining just one variable denoting the number of times you hire a new
of fice assistant, think of the process of hiring as repeated random trials and
define n  variables indicating whether each particular candidate is hired. In
particular , let Xi  be the indicator random variable associated with the event
in which the i th candidate is hired. Thus,
and
Lemma 5.1 gives
E [ Xi ] = Pr {candidate i  is hired},
and we must therefore compute the probability that lines 5–6 of H IRE -
A SSIST ANT  are executed.
Page number: 175
Candidate i  is hired, in line 6, exactly when candidate i  is better than
each of candidates 1 through i  – 1. Because we have assumed that the
candidates arrive in a random order , the first i  candidates have appeared in a
random order . Any one of these first i  candidates is equally likely to be the
best qualified so far . Candidate i  has a probability of 1/ i  of being better
qualified than candidates 1 through i  – 1 and thus a probability of 1/ i  of
being hired. By Lemma 5.1, we conclude that
Now we can compute E [ X ]:
Even though you interview n  people, you actually hire only approximately
ln n  of them, on average. W e summarize this result in the following lemma.
Lemma 5.2
Assuming that the candidates are presented in a random order , algorithm
H IRE -A SSIST ANT  has an average-case total hiring cost of O ( ch  ln n ).
Proof    The bound follows immediately from our definition of the hiring
cost and equation (5.6), which shows that the expected number of hires is
approximately ln n .
▪
The average-case hiring cost is a significant improvement over the
worst-case hiring cost of O ( ch n ).
Exer cises
5.2-1
Page number: 176
In H IRE -A SSIST ANT , assuming that the candidates are presented in a random
order , what is the probability that you hire exactly one time? What is the
probability that you hire exactly n  times?
5.2-2
In H IRE -A SSIST ANT , assuming that the candidates are presented in a random
order , what is the probability that you hire exactly twice?
5.2-3
Use indicator random variables to compute the expected value of the sum of
n  dice.
5.2-4
This exercise asks you to (partly) verify that linearity of expectation holds
even if the random variables are not independent. Consider two 6-sided dice
that are rolled independently . What is the expected value of the sum? Now
consider the case where the first die is rolled normally and then the second
die is set equal to the value shown on the first die. What is the expected
value of the sum? Now consider the case where the first die is rolled
normally and the second die is set equal to 7 minus the value of the first die.
What is the expected value of the sum?
5.2-5
Use indicator random variables to solve the following problem, which is
known as the hat-check problem . Each of n  customers gives a hat to a hat-
check person at a restaurant. The hat-check person gives the hats back to
the customers in a random order . What is the expected number of customers
who get back their own hat?
5.2-6
Let A [1 : n ] be an array of n  distinct numbers. If i  < j  and A [ i ] > A [ j ], then
the pair ( i , j ) is called an inversion  of A . (See Problem 2-4 on page 47 for
more on inversions.) Suppose that the elements of A  form a uniform random
permutation of 〈 1, 2, … , n〉 . Use indicator random variables to compute the
expected number of inversions.
5.3      Randomized algorithms
Page number: 177
In the previous section, we showed how knowing a distribution on the
inputs can help us to analyze the average-case behavior of an algorithm.
What if you do not know the distribution? Then you cannot perform an
average-case analysis. As mentioned in Section 5.1 , however , you might be
able to use a randomized algorithm.
For a problem such as the hiring problem, in which it is helpful to
assume that all permutations of the input are equally likely , a probabilistic
analysis can guide us when developing a randomized algorithm. Instead of
assuming  a distribution of inputs, we impose  a distribution. In particular ,
before running the algorithm, let’ s randomly permute the candidates in
order to enforce the property that every permutation is equally likely .
Although we have modified the algorithm, we still expect to hire a new
of fice assistant approximately ln n  times. But now we expect this to be the
case for any  input, rather than for inputs drawn from a particular
distribution.
Let us further explore the distinction between probabilistic analysis and
randomized algorithms. In Section 5.2 , we claimed that, assuming that the
candidates arrive in a random order , the expected number of times you hire
a new of fice assistant is about ln n . This algorithm is deterministic: for any
particular input, the number of times a new of fice assistant is hired is
always the same. Furthermore, the number of times you hire a new of fice
assistant dif fers for dif ferent inputs, and it depends on the ranks of the
various candidates. Since this number depends only on the ranks of the
candidates, to represent a particular input, we can just list, in order , the
ranks 〈 rank (1), rank (2), … , rank ( n )〉  of the candidates. Given the rank list
A1  = 〈 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 〉 , a new of fice assistant is always hired 10
times, since each successive candidate is better than the previous one, and
lines 5–6 of H IRE -A SSIST ANT  are executed in each iteration. Given the list of
ranks A2  = 〈 10, 9, 8, 7, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1 〉 , a new of fice assistant is hired only
once, in the first iteration. Given a list of ranks A3  = 〈 5, 2, 1, 8, 4, 7, 10, 9,
3, 6 〉 , a new of fice assistant is hired three times, upon interviewing the
candidates with ranks 5, 8, and 10. Recalling that the cost of our algorithm
depends on how many times you hire a new of fice assistant, we see that
there are expensive inputs such as A1 , inexpensive inputs such as A2 , and
moderately expensive inputs such as A3 .
Page number: 178
Consider , on the other hand, the randomized algorithm that first
permutes the list of candidates and then determines the best candidate. In
this case, we randomize in the algorithm, not in the input distribution.
Given a particular input, say A3  above, we cannot say how many times the
maximum is updated, because this quantity dif fers with each run of the
algorithm. The first time you run the algorithm on A3 , it might produce the
permutation A1  and perform 10 updates. But the second time you run the
algorithm, it might produce the permutation A2  and perform only one
update. The third time you run the algorithm, it might perform some other
number of updates. Each time you run the algorithm, its execution depends
on the random choices made and is likely to dif fer from the previous
execution of the algorithm. For this algorithm and many other randomized
algorithms, no particular input elicits its worst-case behavior . Even your
worst enemy cannot produce a bad input array , since the random
permutation makes the input order irrelevant. The randomized algorithm
performs badly only if the random-number generator produces an
“unlucky” permutation.
For the hiring problem, the only change needed in the code is to
randomly permute the array , as done in the R ANDOMIZED -H IRE -A SSIST ANT
procedure. This simple change creates a randomized algorithm whose
performance matches that obtained by assuming that the candidates were
presented in a random order .
R ANDOMIZED -H IRE -A SSIST ANT ( n )
1 randomly permute the list of
candidates
2 H IRE -A SSIST ANT ( n )
Lemma 5.3
The expected hiring cost of the procedure R ANDOMIZED -H IRE -A SSIST ANT  is
O ( ch  ln n ).
Proof    Permuting the input array achieves a situation identical to that of the
probabilistic analysis of H IRE -A SSIST ANT  in Secetion 5.2.
▪
Page number: 179
By carefully comparing Lemmas 5.2 and 5.3, you can see the dif ference
between probabilistic analysis and randomized algorithms. Lemma 5.2
makes an assumption about the input. Lemma 5.3 makes no such
assumption, although randomizing the input takes some additional time. T o
remain consistent with our terminology , we couched Lemma 5.2 in terms of
the average-case hiring cost and Lemma 5.3 in terms of the expected hiring
cost. In the remainder of this section, we discuss some issues involved in
randomly permuting inputs.
Randomly permuting arrays
Many randomized algorithms randomize the input by permuting a given
input array . W e’ll see elsewhere in this book other ways to randomize an
algorithm, but now , let’ s see how we can randomly permute an array of n
elements. The goal is to produce a uniform random permutation , that is, a
permutation that is as likely as any other permutation. Since there are n !
possible permutations, we want the probability that any particular
permutation is produced to be 1/ n !.
Y ou might think that to prove that a permutation is a uniform random
permutation, it suf fices to show that, for each element A [ i ], the probability
that the element winds up in position j  is 1/ n . Exercise 5.3-4 shows that this
weaker condition is, in fact, insuf ficient.
Our method to generate a random permutation permutes the array in
place : at most a constant number of elements of the input array are ever
stored outside the array . The procedure R ANDOML Y -P ERMUTE  permutes an
array A [1 : n ] in place in Θ( n ) time. In its i th iteration, it chooses the
element A [ i ] randomly from among elements A [ i ] through A [ n ]. After the
i th iteration, A [ i ] is never altered.
R ANDOML Y -P ERMUTE ( A , n )
1 for  i  = 1 to  n
2 swap A [ i ] with A [R ANDOM ( i , n )]
W e use a loop invariant to show that procedure R ANDOML Y -P ERMUTE
produces a uniform random permutation. A k-permutation  on a set of n
elements is a sequence containing k  of the n  elements, with no repetitions.
(See page 1 180 in Appendix C .) There are n !/( n  – k )! such possible k -
permutations.
Page number: 180
Lemma 5.4
Procedure R ANDOML Y -P ERMUTE  computes a uniform random permutation.
Proof    W e use the following loop invariant:
Just prior to the i th iteration of the for  loop of lines 1–2, for each
possible ( i  – 1)-permutation of the n  elements, the subarray A [1 : i
– 1] contains this ( i  – 1)-permutation with probability ( n  – i  +
1)!/ n !.
W e need to show that this invariant is true prior to the first loop iteration,
that each iteration of the loop maintains the invariant, that the loop
terminates, and that the invariant provides a useful property to show
correctness when the loop terminates.
Initialization:  Consider the situation just before the first loop iteration, so
that i  = 1. The loop invariant says that for each possible 0-permutation,
the subarray A [1 : 0] contains this 0-permutation with probability ( n  – i  +
1)!/ n ! = n !/ n ! = 1. The subarray A [1 : 0] is an empty subarray , and a 0-
permutation has no elements. Thus, A [1 : 0] contains any 0-permutation
with probability 1, and the loop invariant holds prior to the first iteration.
Maintenance:  By the loop invariant, we assume that just before the i th
iteration, each possible ( i  – 1)-permutation appears in the subarray A [1 : i
– 1] with probability ( n  – i  + 1)!/ n !. W e shall show that after the i th
iteration, each possible i -permutation appears in the subarray A [1 : i ] with
probability ( n  – i )!/ n !. Incrementing i  for the next iteration then maintains
the loop invariant.
Let us examine the i th iteration. Consider a particular i -permutation, and
denote the elements in it by 〈 x1 , x2 , … , xi〉 . This permutation consists of
an ( i  – 1)-permutation 〈 x1 , … , xi –1〉  followed by the value xi  that the
algorithm places in A [ i ]. Let E1  denote the event in which the first i  – 1
iterations have created the particular ( i  – 1)-permutation 〈 x1 , … , xi –1〉  in
A [1 : i  – 1]. By the loop invariant, Pr { E1 } = ( n  – i  + 1)!/ n !. Let E2  be the
event that the i th iteration puts xi  in position A [ i ]. The i -permutation 〈 x1 ,
… , xi〉  appears in A [1 : i ] precisely when both E1  and E2  occur , and so we
wish to compute Pr { E2  ∩ E1 }. Using equation (C.16) on page 1 187, we
have
Page number: 181
Pr { E2  ∩ E1 } = Pr { E2  | E1 } Pr { E1 }.
The probability Pr { E2  | E1 } equals 1/( n  – i  + 1) because in line 2 the
algorithm chooses xi  randomly from the n  – i  + 1 values in positions A [ i  :
n ]. Thus, we have
T ermination:  The loop terminates, since it is a for  loop iterating n  times.
At termination, i  = n  + 1, and we have that the subarray A [1 : n ] is a given
n -permutation with probability ( n  – ( n  + 1) + 1)!/ n ! = 0!/ n ! = 1/ n !.
Thus, R ANDOML Y -P ERMUTE  produces a uniform random permutation.
▪
A randomized algorithm is often the simplest and most ef ficient way to
solve a problem.
Exer cises
5.3-1
Professor Marceau objects to the loop invariant used in the proof of Lemma
5.4. He questions whether it holds prior to the first iteration. He reasons that
we could just as easily declare that an empty subarray contains no 0-
permutations. Therefore, the probability that an empty subarray contains a
0-permutation should be 0, thus invalidating the loop invariant prior to the
first iteration. Rewrite the procedure R ANDOML Y -P ERMUTE  so that its
associated loop invariant applies to a nonempty subarray prior to the first
iteration, and modify the proof of Lemma 5.4 for your procedure.
5.3-2
Professor Kelp decides to write a procedure that produces at random any
permutation except the identity permutation , in which every element ends
up where it started. He proposes the procedure P ERMUTE -W ITHOUT -
I DENTITY . Does this procedure do what Professor Kelp intends?
Page number: 182
P ERMUTE -W ITHOUT -I DENTITY ( A , n )
1 for  i  = 1 to  n  – 1
2 swap A [ i ] with A [R ANDOM ( i  + 1, n )]
5.3-3
Consider the P ERMUTE -W ITH -A LL  procedure on the facing page, which
instead of swapping element A [ i ] with a random element from the subarray
A [ i  : n ], swaps it with a random element from anywhere in the array . Does
P ERMUTE -W ITH -A LL  produce a uniform random permutation? Why or why
not?
P ERMUTE -W ITH -A LL ( A , n )
1 for  i  = 1 to  n
2 swap A [ i ] with A [R ANDOM (1, n )]
5.3-4
Professor Knievel suggests the procedure P ERMUTE -B Y -C YCLE  to generate a
uniform random permutation. Show that each element A [ i ] has a 1/ n
probability of winding up in any particular position in B . Then show that
Professor Knievel is mistaken by showing that the resulting permutation is
not uniformly random.
P ERMUTE -B Y -C YCLE ( A , n )
1 let B [1 : n ] be a new array
2 offset  = R ANDOM (1, n )
3 for  i  = 1 to  n
4 dest  = i  + offset
5 if  dest  > n
6 dest  = dest  – n
7 B [ dest ] = A [ i ]
8 r eturn  B
5.3-5
Professor Gallup wants to create a random sample  of the set {1, 2, 3, … ,
n }, that is, an m -element subset S , where 0 ≤ m  ≤ n , such that each m -subset
is equally likely to be created. One way is to set A [ i ] = i , for i  = 1, 2, 3, … ,
n , call R ANDOML Y -P ERMUTE ( A ), and then take just the first m  array
elements. This method makes n  calls to the R ANDOM  procedure. In
Page number: 183
Professor Gallup’ s application, n  is much lar ger than m , and so the professor
wants to create a random sample with fewer calls to R ANDOM .
R ANDOM -S AMPLE ( m , n )
1 S  = ∅
2 for  k  = n  – m  + 1 to  n //  iterates m  times
3 i  = R ANDOM (1, k )
4 if  i  ∈  S
5 S  = S  ⋃  { k }
6 else  S  = S  ⋃  { i }
7 r eturn  S
Show that the procedure R ANDOM -S AMPLE  on the previous page returns
a random m -subset S  of {1, 2, 3, … , n }, in which each m -subset is equally
likely , while making only m  calls to R ANDOM .
★  5.4      Pr obabilistic analysis and further uses of indicator random
variables
This advanced section further illustrates probabilistic analysis by way of
four examples. The first determines the probability that in a room of k
people, two of them share the same birthday . The second example examines
what happens when randomly tossing balls into bins. The third investigates
“streaks” of consecutive heads when flipping coins. The final example
analyzes a variant of the hiring problem in which you have to make
decisions without actually interviewing all the candidates.
5.4.1    The birthday paradox
Our first example is the birthday paradox . How many people must there be
in a room before there is a 50% chance that two of them were born on the
same day of the year? The answer is surprisingly few . The paradox is that it
is in fact far fewer than the number of days in a year , or even half the
number of days in a year , as we shall see.
T o answer this question, we index the people in the room with the
integers 1, 2, … , k , where k  is the number of people in the room. W e ignore
the issue of leap years and assume that all years have n  = 365 days. For i  =
1, 2, … , k , let bi  be the day of the year on which person i ’ s birthday falls,
Page number: 184
where 1 ≤ bi  ≤ n . W e also assume that birthdays are uniformly distributed
across the n  days of the year , so that Pr { bi  = r } = 1/ n  for i  = 1, 2, … , k  and
r  = 1, 2, … , n .
The probability that two given people, say i  and j , have matching
birthdays depends on whether the random selection of birthdays is
independent. W e assume from now on that birthdays are independent, so
that the probability that i ’ s birthday and j ’ s birthday both fall on day r  is
Thus, the probability that they both fall on the same day is
More intuitively , once bi  is chosen, the probability that bj  is chosen to be the
same day is 1/ n . As long as the birthdays are independent, the probability
that i  and j  have the same birthday is the same as the probability that the
birthday of one of them falls on a given day .
W e can analyze the probability of at least 2 out of k  people having
matching birthdays by looking at the complementary event. The probability
that at least two of the birthdays match is 1 minus the probability that all the
birthdays are dif ferent. The event Bk  that k  people have distinct birthdays is
where Ai  is the event that person i ’ s birthday is dif ferent from person j ’ s for
all j  < i . Since we can write Bk  = Ak  ∩ Bk –1 , we obtain from equation (C.18)
on page 1 189 the recurrence

Page number: 185
where we take Pr { B1 } = Pr { A1 } = 1 as an initial condition. In other words,
the probability that b1 , b2 , … , bk  are distinct birthdays equals the
probability that b1 , b2 , … , bk –1  are distinct birthdays multiplied by the
probability that bk  ≠ bi  for i  = 1, 2, … , k  – 1, given that b1 , b2 , … , bk –1  are
distinct.
If b1 , b2 , … , bk –1  are distinct, the conditional probability that bk  ≠ bi  for
i  = 1, 2, … , k  – 1 is Pr { Ak  | Bk –1 } = ( n  – k  + 1)/ n , since out of the n  days, n
– ( k  – 1) days are not taken. W e iteratively apply the recurrence (5.8) to
obtain
Inequality (3.14) on page 66, 1 + x  ≤ ex, gives us
when – k ( k  – 1)/2 n  ≤ ln(1/2). The probability that all k  birthdays are distinct
is at most 1/2 when k ( k  – 1) ≥ 2 n  ln 2 or , solving the quadratic equation,
when 
 . For n  = 365, we must have k  ≥ 23. Thus, if
at least 23 people are in a room, the probability is at least 1/2 that at least
two people have the same birthday . Since a year on Mars is 669 Martian
days long, it takes 31 Martians to get the same ef fect.
An analysis using indicator random variables
Indicator random variables af ford a simpler but approximate analysis of the
birthday paradox. For each pair ( i , j ) of the k  people in the room, define the
Page number: 186
indicator random variable Xij , for 1 ≤ i  < j  ≤ k , by
By equation (5.7), the probability that two people have matching birthdays
is 1/ n , and thus by Lemma 5.1 on page 130, we have
E [ X ij ] = Pr {person i  and person j  have the same birthday}
= 1/ n .
Letting X  be the random variable that counts the number of pairs of
individuals having the same birthday , we have
T aking expectations of both sides and applying linearity of expectation, we
obtain
When k ( k  – 1) ≥ 2 n , therefore, the expected number of pairs of people with
the same birthday is at least 1. Thus, if we have at least 
  individuals
in a room, we can expect at least two to have the same birthday . For n  =
365, if k  = 28, the expected number of pairs with the same birthday is (28 ·
27)/(2 · 365) ≈ 1.0356. Thus, with at least 28 people, we expect to find at
least one matching pair of birthdays. On Mars, with 669 days per year , we
need at least 38 Martians.
Page number: 187
The first analysis, which used only probabilities, determined the number
of people required for the probability to exceed 1/2 that a matching pair of
birthdays exists, and the second analysis, which used indicator random
variables, determined the number such that the expected number of
matching birthdays is 1. Although the exact numbers of people dif fer for the
two situations, they are the same asymptotically: 
 .
5.4.2    Balls and bins
Consider a process in which you randomly toss identical balls into b  bins,
numbered 1, 2, … , b . The tosses are independent, and on each toss the ball
is equally likely to end up in any bin. The probability that a tossed ball
lands in any given bin is 1/ b . If we view the ball-tossing process as a
sequence of Bernoulli trials (see Appendix C.4 ), where success means that
the ball falls in the given bin, then each trial has a probability 1/ b  of
success. This model is particularly useful for analyzing hashing (see
Chapter 1 1 ), and we can answer a variety of interesting questions about the
ball-tossing process. (Problem C-2 asks additional questions about balls and
bins.)
How many balls fall in a given bin?  The number of balls that fall in a
given bin follows the binomial distribution b ( k ; n , 1/ b ). If you toss n
balls, equation (C.41) on page 1 199 tells us that the expected number
of balls that fall in the given bin is n / b .
How many balls must you toss, on the average, until a given bin
contains a ball?  The number of tosses until the given bin receives a
ball follows the geometric distribution with probability 1/ b  and, by
equation (C.36) on page 1 197, the expected number of tosses until
success is 1/(1/ b ) = b .
How many balls must you toss until every bin contains at least one
ball?  Let us call a toss in which a ball falls into an empty bin a “hit.”
W e want to know the expected number n  of tosses required to get b
hits.
Using the hits, we can partition the n  tosses into stages. The i th stage
consists of the tosses after the ( i  – 1)st hit up to and including the i th
hit. The first stage consists of the first toss, since you are guaranteed
to have a hit when all bins are empty . For each toss during the i th
Page number: 188
stage, i  – 1 bins contain balls and b  – i  + 1 bins are empty . Thus, for
each toss in the i th stage, the probability of obtaining a hit is ( b  – i  +
1)/ b .
Let ni  denote the number of tosses in the i th stage. The number of
tosses required to get b  hits is 
 . Each random variable ni
has a geometric distribution with probability of success ( b  – i  + 1)/ b
and thus, by equation (C.36), we have
By linearity of expectation, we have
It therefore takes approximately b  ln b  tosses before we can expect
that every bin has a ball. This problem is also known as the coupon
collector ’ s problem , which says that if you are trying to collect each
of b  dif ferent coupons, then you should expect to acquire
approximately b  ln b  randomly obtained coupons in order to succeed.
5.4.3    Str eaks
Suppose that you flip a fair coin n  times. What is the longest streak of
consecutive heads that you expect to see? W e’ll prove upper and lower
bounds separately to show that the answer is Θ(lg n ).
W e first prove that the expected length of the longest streak of heads is
O (lg n ). The probability that each coin flip is a head is 1/2. Let Aik  be the
Page number: 189
event that a streak of heads of length at least k  begins with the i th coin flip
or , more precisely , the event that the k  consecutive coin flips i , i  + 1, … , i  +
k  – 1 yield only heads, where 1 ≤ k  ≤ n  and 1 ≤ i  ≤ n  – k  + 1. Since coin flips
are mutually independent, for any given event Aik , the probability that all k
flips are heads is
and thus the probability that a streak of heads of length at least 2 ⌈ lg n ⌉
begins in position i  is quite small. There are at most n  – 2 ⌈ lg n ⌉  + 1
positions where such a streak can begin. The probability that a streak of
heads of length at least 2 ⌈ lg n ⌉  begins anywhere is therefore
W e can use inequality (5.10) to bound the length of the longest streak.
For j  = 0, 1, 2, … , n , let Lj  be the event that the longest streak of heads has
Page number: 190
length exactly j , and let L  be the length of the longest streak. By the
definition of expected value, we have
W e could try to evaluate this sum using upper bounds on each Pr { Lj }
similar to those computed in inequality (5.10). Unfortunately , this method
yields weak bounds. W e can use some intuition gained by the above
analysis to obtain a good bound, however . For no individual term in the
summation in equation (5.1 1) are both the factors j  and Pr { Lj } lar ge. Why?
When j  ≥ 2 ⌈ lg n ⌉ , then Pr { Lj } is very small, and when j  < 2 ⌈ lg n ⌉ , then j  is
fairly small. More precisely , since the events Lj  for j  = 0, 1, … , n  are
disjoint, the probability that a streak of heads of length at least 2 ⌈ lg n ⌉
begins anywhere is 
 . Inequality (5.10) tells us that the
probability that a streak of heads of length at least 2 ⌈ lg n ⌉  begins anywhere
is less than 1/ n , which means that 
 . Also, noting that 
, we have that 
 . Thus, we obtain
The probability that a streak of heads exceeds r  ⌈ lg n ⌉  flips diminishes
quickly with r . Let’ s get a rough bound on the probability that a streak of at
Page number: 191
least r  ⌈ lg n ⌉  heads occurs, for r  ≥ 1. The probability that a streak of at least
r  ⌈ lg n ⌉  heads starts in position i  is
A streak of at least r  ⌈ lg n ⌉  heads cannot start in the last n  – r  ⌈ lg n ⌉  + 1
flips, but let’ s overestimate the probability of such a streak by allowing it to
start anywhere within the n  coin flips. Then the probability that a streak of
at least r  ⌈ lg n ⌉  heads occurs is at most
Equivalently , the probability is at least 1 – 1/ nr –1 that the longest streak has
length less than r  ⌈ lg n ⌉ .
As an example, during n  = 1000 coin flips, the probability of
encountering a streak of at least 2 ⌈ lg n ⌉  = 20 heads is at most 1/ n  = 1/1000.
The chance of a streak of at least 3 ⌈ lg n ⌉  = 30 heads is at most 1/ n2 =
1/1,000,000.
Let’ s now prove a complementary lower bound: the expected length of
the longest streak of heads in n  coin flips is Ω(lg n ). T o prove this bound,
we look for streaks of length s  by partitioning the n  flips into approximately
n / s  groups of s  flips each. If we choose s  = ⌊ (lg n )/2 ⌋ , we’ll see that it is
likely that at least one of these groups comes up all heads, which means that
it’ s likely that the longest streak has length at least s  = Ω(lg n ). W e’ll then
show that the longest streak has expected length Ω(lg n ).
Let’ s partition the n  coin flips into at least ⌊ n / ⌊ (lg n )/2 ⌋ ⌋  groups of ⌊ (lg
n )/2 ⌋  consecutive flips and bound the probability that no group comes up all
heads. By equation (5.9), the probability that the group starting in position i
comes up all heads is
Page number: 192
The probability that a streak of heads of length at least ⌊ (lg n )/2 ⌋  does not
begin in position i  is therefore at most 
 . Since the ⌊ n / ⌊ (lg n )/2 ⌋ ⌋
groups are formed from mutually exclusive, independent coin flips, the
probability that every one of these groups fails  to be a streak of length ⌊ (lg
n )/2 ⌋  is at most
For this ar gument, we used inequality (3.14), 1 + x  ≤ ex, on page 66 and the
fact, which you may verify , that 
  for suf ficiently lar ge
n .
W e want to bound the probability that the longest streak equals or
exceeds ⌊ (lg n )/2 ⌋ . T o do so, let L  be the event that the longest streak of
heads equals or exceeds s  = ⌊ (lg n )/2 ⌋ . Let L  be the complementary event,
that the longest streak of heads is strictly less than s , so that Pr { L } + Pr { L }
= 1. Let F  be the event that every group of s  flips fails to be a streak of s
heads. By inequality (5.12), we have Pr { F } = O (1/ n ). If the longest streak
of heads is less than s , then certainly every group of s  flips fails to be a
streak of s  heads, which means that event L  implies event F . Of course,
event F  could occur even if event L  does not (for example, if a streak of s  or
more heads crosses over the boundary between two groups), and so we have
Pr { L } ≤ Pr { F } = O (1/ n ). Since Pr { L } + Pr { L } = 1, we have that
Pr { L } = 1 – Pr { L }
≥ 1 – Pr { F }
= 1 – O (1/ n ).
That is, the probability that the longest streak equals or exceeds ⌊ (lg n )/2 ⌋  is
Page number: 193
W e can now calculate a lower bound on the expected length of the
longest streak, beginning with equation (5.1 1) and proceeding in a manner
similar to our analysis of the upper bound:
As with the birthday paradox, we can obtain a simpler , but approximate,
analysis using indicator random variables. Instead of determining the
expected length of the longest streak, we’ll find the expected number of
streaks with at least a given length. Let Xik  = I { Aik } be the indicator
random variable associated with a streak of heads of length at least k
beginning with the i th coin flip. T o count the total number of such streaks,
define
T aking expectations and using linearity of expectation, we have
Page number: 194
By plugging in various values for k , we can calculate the expected
number of streaks of length at least k . If this expected number is lar ge
(much greater than 1), then we expect many streaks of length k  to occur ,
and the probability that one occurs is high. If this expected number is small
(much less than 1), then we expect to see few streaks of length k , and the
probability that one occurs is low . If k  = c  lg n , for some positive constant c ,
we obtain
If c  is lar ge, the expected number of streaks of length c  lg n  is small, and we
conclude that they are unlikely to occur . On the other hand, if c  = 1/2, then
we obtain E [ X(1/2) lg n ] = Θ(1/ n1/2–1) = Θ( n1/2), and we expect there to be
numerous streaks of length (1/2) lg n . Therefore, one streak of such a length
is likely to occur . W e can conclude that the expected length of the longest
streak is Θ(lg n ).
5.4.4    The online hiring pr oblem
Page number: 195
As a final example, let’ s consider a variant of the hiring problem. Suppose
now that you do not wish to interview all the candidates in order to find the
best one. Y ou also want to avoid hiring and firing as you find better and
better applicants. Instead, you are willing to settle for a candidate who is
close to the best, in exchange for hiring exactly once. Y ou must obey one
company requirement: after each interview you must either immediately
of fer the position to the applicant or immediately reject the applicant. What
is the trade-of f between minimizing the amount of interviewing and
maximizing the quality of the candidate hired?
W e can model this problem in the following way . After meeting an
applicant, you are able to give each one a score. Let scor e ( i ) denote the
score you give to the i th applicant, and assume that no two applicants
receive the same score. After you have seen j  applicants, you know which
of the j  has the highest score, but you do not know whether any of the
remaining n  – j  applicants will receive a higher score. Y ou decide to adopt
the strategy of selecting a positive integer k  < n , interviewing and then
rejecting the first k  applicants, and hiring the first applicant thereafter who
has a higher score than all preceding applicants. If it turns out that the best-
qualified applicant was among the first k  interviewed, then you hire the n th
applicant—the last one interviewed. W e formalize this strategy in the
procedure O NLINE -M AXIMUM ( k , n ), which returns the index of the candidate
you wish to hire.
O NLINE -M AXIMUM ( k , n )
1 best - scor e  = –∞
2 for  i  = 1 to  k
3 if  scor e ( i ) > best - scor e
4 best-scor e  = scor e ( i )
5 for  i  = k  + 1 to  n
6 if  scor e ( i ) > best-scor e
7 r eturn  i
8 r eturn  n
If we determine, for each possible value of k , the probability that you
hire the most qualified applicant, then you can choose the best possible k
and implement the strategy with that value. For the moment, assume that k
is fixed. Let M ( j ) = max { scor e ( i ) : 1 ≤ i  ≤ j } denote the maximum score
among applicants 1 through j . Let S  be the event that you succeed in
Page number: 196
choosing the best-qualified applicant, and let Si  be the event that you
succeed when the best-qualified applicant is the i th one interviewed. Since
the various Si  are disjoint, we have that 
 . Noting that
you never succeed when the best-qualified applicant is one of the first k , we
have that Pr { Si } = 0 for i  = 1, 2, … , k . Thus, we obtain
W e now compute Pr { Si }. In order to succeed when the best-qualified
applicant is the i th one, two things must happen. First, the best-qualified
applicant must be in position i , an event which we denote by Bi . Second, the
algorithm must not select any of the applicants in positions k  + 1 through i  –
1, which happens only if, for each j  such that k  + 1 ≤ j  ≤ i  – 1, line 6 finds
that scor e ( j ) < best-scor e . (Because scores are unique, we can ignore the
possibility of scor e ( j ) = best-scor e .) In other words, all of the values scor e ( k
+ 1) through scor e ( i  – 1) must be less than M ( k ). If any are greater than
M ( k ), the algorithm instead returns the index of the first one that is greater .
W e use Oi  to denote the event that none of the applicants in position k  + 1
through i  – 1 are chosen. Fortunately , the two events Bi  and Oi  are
independent. The event Oi  depends only on the relative ordering of the
values in positions 1 through i  – 1, whereas Bi  depends only on whether the
value in position i  is greater than the values in all other positions. The
ordering of the values in positions 1 through i  – 1 does not af fect whether
the value in position i  is greater than all of them, and the value in position i
does not af fect the ordering of the values in positions 1 through i  – 1. Thus,
we can apply equation (C.17) on page 1 188 to obtain
Pr { Si } = Pr { Bi  ∩ Oi } = Pr { Bi } Pr { Oi }.
W e have Pr { Bi } = 1/ n  since the maximum is equally likely to be in any one
of the n  positions. For event Oi  to occur , the maximum value in positions 1
through i  –1, which is equally likely to be in any of these i  – 1 positions,
must be in one of the first k  positions. Consequently , Pr { Oi } = k /( i  – 1) and
Pr { Si } = k /( n ( i  – 1)). Using equation (5.14), we have
Page number: 197
W e approximate by integrals to bound this summation from above and
below . By the inequalities (A.19) on page 1 150, we have
Evaluating these definite integrals gives us the bounds
which provide a rather tight bound for Pr { S }. Because you wish to
maximize your probability of success, let us focus on choosing the value of
k  that maximizes the lower bound on Pr { S }. (Besides, the lower -bound
expression is easier to maximize than the upper -bound expression.)
Dif ferentiating the expression ( k / n )(ln n  – ln k ) with respect to k , we obtain
Setting this derivative equal to 0, we see that you maximize the lower
bound on the probability when ln k  = ln n  – 1 = ln( n / e ) or , equivalently ,
when k  = n / e . Thus, if you implement our strategy with k  = n / e , you succeed
in hiring the best-qualified applicant with probability at least 1/ e .
Exer cises
5.4-1
How many people must there be in a room before the probability that
someone has the same birthday as you do is at least 1/2? How many people
Page number: 198
must there be before the probability that at least two people have a birthday
on July 4 is greater than 1/2?
5.4-2
How many people must there be in a room before the probability that two
people have the same birthday is at least 0.99? For that many people, what
is the expected number of pairs of people who have the same birthday?
5.4-3
Y ou toss balls into b  bins until some bin contains two balls. Each toss is
independent, and each ball is equally likely to end up in any bin. What is
the expected number of ball tosses?
★  5.4-4
For the analysis of the birthday paradox, is it important that the birthdays be
mutually independent, or is pairwise independence suf ficient? Justify your
answer .
★  5.4-5
How many people should be invited to a party in order to make it likely that
there are thr ee  people with the same birthday?
★  5.4-6
What is the probability that a k -string (defined on page 1 179) over a set of
size n  forms a k -permutation? How does this question relate to the birthday
paradox?
★  5.4-7
Y ou toss n  balls into n  bins, where each toss is independent and the ball is
equally likely to end up in any bin. What is the expected number of empty
bins? What is the expected number of bins with exactly one ball?
★  5.4-8
Sharpen the lower bound on streak length by showing that in n  flips of a fair
coin, the probability is at least 1 – 1/ n  that a streak of length lg n  – 2 lg lg n
consecutive heads occurs.
Pr oblems
Page number: 199
5-1     Probabilistic counting
W ith a b -bit counter , we can ordinarily only count up to 2b – 1. W ith R.
Morris’ s probabilistic counting , we can count up to a much lar ger value at
the expense of some loss of precision.
W e let a counter value of i  represent a count of ni  for i  = 0, 1, … , 2b – 1,
where the ni  form an increasing sequence of nonnegative values. W e
assume that the initial value of the counter is 0, representing a count of n0  =
0. The I NCREMENT  operation works on a counter containing the value i  in a
probabilistic manner . If i  = 2b – 1, then the operation reports an overflow
error . Otherwise, the I NCREMENT  operation increases the counter by 1 with
probability 1/( ni  + 1  – ni ), and it leaves the counter unchanged with
probability 1 – 1/( ni  + 1  – ni ).
If we select ni  = i  for all i  ≥ 0, then the counter is an ordinary one. More
interesting situations arise if we select, say , ni  = 2i  – 1 for i  > 0 or ni  = Fi  (the
i th Fibonacci number—see equation (3.31) on page 69).
For this problem, assume that 
  is lar ge enough that the probability
of an overflow error is negligible.
a.  Show that the expected value represented by the counter after n
I NCREMENT  operations have been performed is exactly n .
b.  The analysis of the variance of the count represented by the counter
depends on the sequence of the ni . Let us consider a simple case: ni  = 100 i
for all i  ≥ 0. Estimate the variance in the value represented by the register
after n  I NCREMENT  operations have been performed.
5-2     Searching an unsorted array
This problem examines three algorithms for searching for a value x  in an
unsorted array A  consisting of n  elements.
Consider the following randomized strategy: pick a random index i  into
A . If A [ i ] = x , then terminate; otherwise, continue the search by picking a
new random index into A . Continue picking random indices into A  until you
find an index j  such that A [ j ] = x  or until every element of A  has been
checked. This strategy may examine a given element more than once,
because it picks from the whole set of indices each time.
Page number: 200
a.  W rite pseudocode for a procedure R ANDOM -S EARCH  to implement the
strategy above. Be sure that your algorithm terminates when all indices
into A  have been picked.
b.  Suppose that there is exactly one index i  such that A [ i ] = x . What is the
expected number of indices into A  that must be picked before x  is found
and R ANDOM -S EARCH  terminates?
c.  Generalizing your solution to part (b), suppose that there are k  ≥ 1 indices
i  such that A [ i ] = x . What is the expected number of indices into A  that
must be picked before x  is found and R ANDOM -S EARCH  terminates? Y our
answer should be a function of n  and k .
d.  Suppose that there are no indices i  such that A [ i ] = x . What is the
expected number of indices into A  that must be picked before all elements
of A  have been checked and R ANDOM -S EARCH  terminates?
Now consider a deterministic linear search algorithm. The algorithm, which
we call D ETERMINISTIC -S EARCH , searches A  for x  in order , considering A [1],
A [2], A [3], … , A [ n ] until either it finds A [ i ] = x  or it reaches the end of the
array . Assume that all possible permutations of the input array are equally
likely .
e.  Suppose that there is exactly one index i  such that A [ i ] = x . What is the
average-case running time of D ETERMINISTIC -S EARCH ? What is the worst-
case running time of D ETERMINISTIC -S EARCH ?
f.  Generalizing your solution to part (e), suppose that there are k  ≥ 1 indices
i  such that A [ i ] = x . What is the average-case running time of
D ETERMINISTIC -S EARCH ? What is the worst-case running time of
D ETERMINISTIC -S EARCH ? Y our answer should be a function of n  and k .
g.  Suppose that there are no indices i  such that A [ i ] = x . What is the
average-case running time of D ETERMINISTIC -S EARCH ? What is the worst-
case running time of D ETERMINISTIC -S EARCH ?
Finally , consider a randomized algorithm S CRAMBLE -S EARCH  that first
randomly permutes the input array and then runs the deterministic linear
search given above on the resulting permuted array .
Page number: 201
h.  Letting k  be the number of indices i  such that A [ i ] = x , give the worst-
case and expected running times of S CRAMBLE -S EARCH  for the cases in
which k  = 0 and k  = 1. Generalize your solution to handle the case in
which k  ≥ 1.
i.  Which of the three searching algorithms would you use? Explain your
answer .
Chapter notes
Bollobás [ 65 ], Hofri [ 223 ], and Spencer [ 420 ] contain a wealth of advanced
probabilistic techniques. The advantages of randomized algorithms are
discussed and surveyed by Karp [ 249 ] and Rabin [ 372 ]. The textbook by
Motwani and Raghavan [ 336 ] gives an extensive treatment of randomized
algorithms.
The R ANDOML Y -P ERMUTE  procedure is by Durstenfeld [ 128 ], based on
an earlier procedure by Fisher and Y ates [ 143 , p. 34].
Several variants of the hiring problem have been widely studied. These
problems are more commonly referred to as “secretary problems.”
Examples of work in this area are the paper by Ajtai, Meggido, and W aarts
[ 1 1 ] and another by Kleinber g [ 258 ], which ties the secretary problem to
online ad auctions.
Page number: 202
Part II    Sorting and Order Statistics
Page number: 203
 
 
Intr oduction
This part presents several algorithms that solve the following sorting
problem :
Input:  A sequence of n  numbers 〈 a1 , a2 , … , an〉 .
Output:  A permutation (reordering) 
  of the input sequence
such that 
 .
The input sequence is usually an n -element array , although it may be
represented in some other fashion, such as a linked list.
The structur e of the data
In practice, the numbers to be sorted are rarely isolated values. Each is
usually part of a collection of data called a record . Each record contains a
key , which is the value to be sorted. The remainder of the record consists of
satellite data , which are usually carried around with the key . In practice,
when a sorting algorithm permutes the keys, it must permute the satellite
data as well. If each record includes a lar ge amount of satellite data, it often
pays to permute an array of pointers to the records rather than the records
themselves in order to minimize data movement.
In a sense, it is these implementation details that distinguish an
algorithm from a full-blown program. A sorting algorithm describes the
method  to determine the sorted order , regardless of whether what’ s being
sorted are individual numbers or lar ge records containing many bytes of
satellite data. Thus, when focusing on the problem of sorting, we typically
assume that the input consists only of numbers. T ranslating an algorithm for
sorting numbers into a program for sorting records is conceptually
Page number: 204
straightforward, although in a given engineering situation other subtleties
may make the actual programming task a challenge.
Why sorting?
Many computer scientists consider sorting to be the most fundamental
problem in the study of algorithms. There are several reasons:
Sometimes an application inherently needs to sort information. For
example, in order to prepare customer statements, banks need to sort
checks by check number .
Algorithms often use sorting as a key subroutine. For example, a
program that renders graphical objects which are layered on top of
each other might have to sort the objects according to an “above”
relation so that it can draw these objects from bottom to top. W e will
see numerous algorithms in this text that use sorting as a subroutine.
W e can draw from among a wide variety of sorting algorithms, and
they employ a rich set of techniques. In fact, many important
techniques used throughout algorithm design appear in sorting
algorithms that have been developed over the years. In this way ,
sorting is also a problem of historical interest.
W e can prove a nontrivial lower bound for sorting (as we’ll do in
Chapter 8 ). Since the best upper bounds match the lower bound
asymptotically , we can conclude that certain of our sorting algorithms
are asymptotically optimal. Moreover , we can use the lower bound
for sorting to prove lower bounds for various other problems.
Many engineering issues come to the fore when implementing sorting
algorithms. The fastest sorting program for a particular situation may
depend on many factors, such as prior knowledge about the keys and
satellite data, the memory hierarchy (caches and virtual memory) of
the host computer , and the software environment. Many of these
issues are best dealt with at the algorithmic level, rather than by
“tweaking” the code.
Sorting algorithms
W e introduced two algorithms that sort n  real numbers in Chapter 2 .
Insertion sort takes Θ( n2) time in the worst case. Because its inner loops are
Page number: 205
tight, however , it is a fast sorting algorithm for small input sizes. Moreover ,
unlike mer ge sort, it sorts in place , meaning that at most a constant number
of elements of the input array are ever stored outside the array , which can
be advantageous for space ef ficiency . Mer ge sort has a better asymptotic
running time, Θ( n  lg n ), but the M ERGE  procedure it uses does not operate in
place. (W e’ll see a parallelized version of mer ge sort in Section 26.3 .)
This part introduces two more algorithms that sort arbitrary real
numbers. Heapsort, presented in Chapter 6 , sorts n  numbers in place in O ( n
lg n ) time. It uses an important data structure, called a heap, which can also
implement a priority queue.
Quicksort, in Chapter 7 , also sorts n  numbers in place, but its worst-case
running time is Θ( n2). Its expected running time is Θ( n  lg n ), however , and
it generally outperforms heapsort in practice. Like insertion sort, quicksort
has tight code, and so the hidden constant factor in its running time is small.
It is a popular algorithm for sorting lar ge arrays.
Insertion sort, mer ge sort, heapsort, and quicksort are all comparison
sorts: they determine the sorted order of an input array by comparing
elements. Chapter 8  begins by introducing the decision-tree model in order
to study the performance limitations of comparison sorts. Using this model,
we prove a lower bound of Ω( n  lg n ) on the worst-case running time of any
comparison sort on n  inputs, thus showing that heapsort and mer ge sort are
asymptotically optimal comparison sorts.
Chapter 8  then goes on to show that we might be able to beat this lower
bound of Ω( n  lg n ) if an algorithm can gather information about the sorted
order of the input by means other than comparing elements. The counting
sort algorithm, for example, assumes that the input numbers belong to the
set {0, 1, … , k }. By using array indexing as a tool for determining relative
order , counting sort can sort n  numbers in Θ( k  + n ) time. Thus, when k  =
O ( n ), counting sort runs in time that is linear in the size of the input array . A
related algorithm, radix sort, can be used to extend the range of counting
sort. If there are n  integers to sort, each integer has d  digits, and each digit
can take on up to k  possible values, then radix sort can sort the numbers in
Θ( d ( n  + k )) time. When d  is a constant and k  is O ( n ), radix sort runs in
linear time. A third algorithm, bucket sort, requires knowledge of the
probabilistic distribution of numbers in the input array . It can sort n  real
numbers uniformly distributed in the half-open interval [0, 1) in average-
case O ( n ) time.
Page number: 206
The table on the following page summarizes the running times of the
sorting algorithms from Chapters 2  and 6 – 8 . As usual, n  denotes the
number of items to sort. For counting sort, the items to sort are integers in
the set {0, 1, … , k }. For radix sort, each item is a d -digit number , where
each digit takes on k  possible values. For bucket sort, we assume that the
keys are real numbers uniformly distributed in the half-open interval [0, 1).
The rightmost column gives the average-case or expected running time,
indicating which one it gives when it dif fers from the worst-case running
time. W e omit the average-case running time of heapsort because we do not
analyze it in this book.
Algorithm W orst-case running time A verage-case/expected running time
Insertion sort Θ( n2) Θ( n2)
Mer ge sort Θ( n  lg n ) Θ( n  lg n )
Heapsort O ( n  lg n ) —
Quicksort Θ( n2)Θ( n  lg n ) (expected)
Counting sort Θ( k  + n ) Θ( k  + n )
Radix sort Θ( d ( n  + k )) Θ( d ( n  + k ))
Bucket sort Θ( n2)Θ( n ) (average-case)
Order statistics
The i th order statistic of a set of n  numbers is the i th smallest number in the
set. Y ou can, of course, select the i th order statistic by sorting the input and
indexing the i th element of the output. W ith no assumptions about the input
distribution, this method runs in Ω( n  lg n ) time, as the lower bound proved
in Chapter 8  shows.
Chapter 9  shows how to find the i th smallest element in O ( n ) time, even
when the elements are arbitrary real numbers. W e present a randomized
algorithm with tight pseudocode that runs in Θ( n2) time in the worst case,
but whose expected running time is O ( n ). W e also give a more complicated
algorithm that runs in O ( n ) worst-case time.
Backgr ound
Although most of this part does not rely on dif ficult mathematics, some
sections do require mathematical sophistication. In particular , analyses of
quicksort, bucket sort, and the order -statistic algorithm use probability ,
Page number: 207
which is reviewed in Appendix C , and the material on probabilistic analysis
and randomized algorithms in Chapter 5 .
Page number: 208
6          Heapsort
This chapter introduces another sorting algorithm: heapsort. Like mer ge
sort, but unlike insertion sort, heapsort’ s running time is O ( n  lg n ). Like
insertion sort, but unlike mer ge sort, heapsort sorts in place: only a constant
number of array elements are stored outside the input array at any time.
Thus, heapsort combines the better attributes of the two sorting algorithms
we have already discussed.
Heapsort also introduces another algorithm design technique: using a
data structure, in this case one we call a “heap,” to manage information. Not
only is the heap data structure useful for heapsort, but it also makes an
ef ficient priority queue. The heap data structure will reappear in algorithms
in later chapters.
The term “heap” was originally coined in the context of heapsort, but it
has since come to refer to “garbage-collected storage,” such as the
programming languages Java and Python provide. Please don’ t be confused.
The heap data structure is not  garbage-collected storage. This book is
consistent in using the term “heap” to refer to the data structure, not the
storage class.
6.1      Heaps
The (binary) heap  data structure is an array object that we can view as a
nearly complete binary tree (see Section B.5.3 ), as shown in Figure 6.1 .
Each node of the tree corresponds to an element of the array . The tree is
completely filled on all levels except possibly the lowest, which is filled
from the left up to a point. An array A [1 : n ] that represents a heap is an
object with an attribute A.heap-size , which represents how many elements
Page number: 209
in the heap are stored within array A . That is, although A [1 : n ] may contain
numbers, only the elements in A [1 : A.heap-size ], where 0 ≤ A.heap-size  ≤
n , are valid elements of the heap. If A.heap-size  = 0, then the heap is empty .
The root of the tree is A [1], and given the index i  of a node, there’ s a simple
way to compute the indices of its parent, left child, and right child with the
one-line procedures P ARENT , L EFT , and R IGHT .
Figur e 6.1  A max-heap viewed as (a)  a binary tree and (b)  an array . The number within the circle at
each node in the tree is the value stored at that node. The number above a node is the corresponding
index in the array . Above and below the array are lines showing parent-child relationships, with
parents always to the left of their children. The tree has height 3, and the node at index 4 (with value
8) has height 1.
P ARENT ( i )
1 r eturn  ⌊ i /2 ⌋
L EFT ( i )
1 r eturn  2 i
R IGHT ( i )
1 r eturn  2 i  + 1
On most computers, the L EFT  procedure can compute 2 i  in one
instruction by simply shifting the binary representation of i  left by one bit
position. Similarly , the R IGHT  procedure can quickly compute 2 i  + 1 by
shifting the binary representation of i  left by one bit position and then
adding 1. The P ARENT  procedure can compute ⌊ i /2 ⌋  by shifting i  right one
bit position. Good implementations of heapsort often implement these
procedures as macros or inline procedures.
Page number: 210
There are two kinds of binary heaps: max-heaps and min-heaps. In both
kinds, the values in the nodes satisfy a heap property , the specifics of which
depend on the kind of heap. In a max-heap , the max-heap property  is that
for every node i  other than the root,
A [P ARENT ( i )] ≥ A [ i ],
that is, the value of a node is at most the value of its parent. Thus, the
lar gest element in a max-heap is stored at the root, and the subtree rooted at
a node contains values no lar ger than that contained at the node itself. A
min-heap  is or ganized in the opposite way: the min-heap property  is that
for every node i  other than the root,
A [P ARENT ( i )] ≤ A [ i ].
The smallest element in a min-heap is at the root.
The heapsort algorithm uses max-heaps. Min-heaps commonly
implement priority queues, which we discuss in Section 6.5 . W e’ll be
precise in specifying whether we need a max-heap or a min-heap for any
particular application, and when properties apply to either max-heaps or
min-heaps, we just use the term “heap.”
V iewing a heap as a tree, we define the height  of a node in a heap to be
the number of edges on the longest simple downward path from the node to
a leaf, and we define the height of the heap to be the height of its root. Since
a heap of n  elements is based on a complete binary tree, its height is Θ(lg n )
(see Exercise 6.1-2). As we’ll see, the basic operations on heaps run in time
at most proportional to the height of the tree and thus take O (lg n ) time. The
remainder of this chapter presents some basic procedures and shows how
they are used in a sorting algorithm and a priority-queue data structure.
The M AX -H EAPIFY  procedure, which runs in O (lg n ) time, is the key
to maintaining the max-heap property .
The B UILD -M AX -H EAP  procedure, which runs in linear time, produces
a max-heap from an unordered input array .
The H EAPSOR T  procedure, which runs in O ( n  lg n ) time, sorts an array
in place.
The procedures M AX -H EAP -I NSER T , M AX -H EAP -E XTRACT -M AX , M AX -
H EAP -I NCREASE -K EY , and M AX -H EAP -M AXIMUM  allow the heap data
structure to implement a priority queue. They run in O (lg n ) time plus
Page number: 211
the time for mapping between objects being inserted into the priority
queue and indices in the heap.
Exer cises
6.1-1
What are the minimum and maximum numbers of elements in a heap of
height h ?
6.1-2
Show that an n -element heap has height ⌊ lg n ⌋ .
6.1-3
Show that in any subtree of a max-heap, the root of the subtree contains the
lar gest value occurring anywhere in that subtree.
6.1-4
Where in a max-heap might the smallest element reside, assuming that all
elements are distinct?
6.1-5
At which levels in a max-heap might the k th lar gest element reside, for 2 ≤
k  ≤ ⌊ n /2 ⌋ , assuming that all elements are distinct?
6.1-6
Is an array that is in sorted order a min-heap?
6.1-7
Is the array with values 〈 33, 19, 20, 15, 13, 10, 2, 13, 16, 12 〉  a max-heap?
6.1-8
Show that, with the array representation for storing an n -element heap, the
leaves are the nodes indexed by ⌊ n /2 ⌋  + 1, ⌊ n /2 ⌋  + 2, … , n .
6.2      Maintaining the heap pr operty
The procedure M AX -H EAPIFY  on the facing page maintains the max-heap
property . Its inputs are an array A  with the heap-size  attribute and an index i
into the array . When it is called, M AX -H EAPIFY  assumes that the binary trees
Page number: 212
rooted at L EFT ( i ) and R IGHT ( i ) are max-heaps, but that A [ i ] might be smaller
than its children, thus violating the max-heap property . M AX -H EAPIFY  lets
the value at A [ i ] “float down” in the max-heap so that the subtree rooted at
index i  obeys the max-heap property .
Figure 6.2  illustrates the action of M AX -H EAPIFY . Each step determines
the lar gest of the elements A [ i ], A [L EFT ( i )], and A [R IGHT ( i )] and stores the
index of the lar gest element in lar gest . If A [ i ] is lar gest, then the subtree
rooted at node i  is already a max-heap and nothing else needs to be done.
Otherwise, one of the two children contains the lar gest element. Positions i
and lar gest  swap their contents, which causes node i  and its children to
satisfy the max-heap property . The node indexed by lar gest , however , just
had its value decreased, and thus the subtree rooted at lar gest  might violate
the max-heap property . Consequently , M AX -H EAPIFY  calls itself recursively
on that subtree.
Page number: 213
Figur e 6.2  The action of M AX -H EAPIFY ( A , 2), where A.heap-size  = 10. The node that potentially
violates the max-heap property is shown in blue. (a)  The initial configuration, with A [2] at node i  = 2
violating the max-heap property since it is not lar ger than both children. The max-heap property is
restored for node 2 in (b)  by exchanging A [2] with A [4], which destroys the max-heap property for
node 4. The recursive call M AX -H EAPIFY ( A , 4) now has i  = 4. After A [4] and A [9] are swapped, as
shown in (c) , node 4 is fixed up, and the recursive call M AX -H EAPIFY ( A , 9) yields no further
change to the data structure.
M AX -H EAPIFY ( A , i )
  1 l  = L EFT ( i )
  2 r  = R IGHT ( i )
  3 if  l  ≤ A.heap-size  and A [ l ] > A [ i ]
  4 lar gest  = l
  5 else  lar gest  = i
  6 if  r  ≤ A.heap-size  and A [ r ] > A [ lar gest ]
  7 lar gest  = r
  8 if  lar gest  ≠ i
  9 exchange A [ i ] with A [ lar gest ]
10 M AX -H EAPIFY ( A , lar gest )
Page number: 214
T o analyze M AX -H EAPIFY , let T  ( n ) be the worst-case running time that
the procedure takes on a subtree of size at most n . For a tree rooted at a
given node i , the running time is the Θ(1) time to fix up the relationships
among the elements A [ i ], A [L EFT ( i )], and A [R IGHT ( i )], plus the time to run
M AX -H EAPIFY  on a subtree rooted at one of the children of node i  (assuming
that the recursive call occurs). The children’ s subtrees each have size at
most 2 n /3 (see Exercise 6.2-2), and therefore we can describe the running
time of M AX -H EAPIFY  by the recurrence
The solution to this recurrence, by case 2 of the master theorem (Theorem
4.1 on page 102), is T  ( n ) = O (lg n ). Alternatively , we can characterize the
running time of M AX -H EAPIFY  on a node of height h  as O ( h ).
Exer cises
6.2-1
Using Figure 6.2  as a model, illustrate the operation of M AX -H EAPIFY ( A , 3)
on the array A  = 〈 27, 17, 3, 16, 13, 10, 1, 5, 7, 12, 4, 8, 9, 0 〉 .
6.2-2
Show that each child of the root of an n -node heap is the root of a subtree
containing at most 2 n /3 nodes. What is the smallest constant α  such that
each subtree has at most α n  nodes? How does that af fect the recurrence
(6.1) and its solution?
6.2-3
Starting with the procedure M AX -H EAPIFY , write pseudocode for the
procedure M IN -H EAPIFY ( A , i ), which performs the corresponding
manipulation on a min-heap. How does the running time of M IN -H EAPIFY
compare with that of M AX -H EAPIFY ?
6.2-4
What is the ef fect of calling M AX -H EAPIFY ( A , i ) when the element A [ i ] is
lar ger than its children?
6.2-5
What is the ef fect of calling M AX -H EAPIFY ( A , i ) for i  > A.heap-size /2?
Page number: 215
6.2-6
The code for M AX -H EAPIFY  is quite ef ficient in terms of constant factors,
except possibly for the recursive call in line 10, for which some compilers
might produce inef ficient code. W rite an ef ficient M AX -H EAPIFY  that uses
an iterative control construct (a loop) instead of recursion.
6.2-7
Show that the worst-case running time of M AX -H EAPIFY  on a heap of size n
is Ω(lg n ). ( Hint:  For a heap with n  nodes, give node values that cause
M AX -H EAPIFY  to be called recursively at every node on a simple path from
the root down to a leaf.)
6.3      Building a heap
The procedure B UILD -M AX -H EAP  converts an array A [1 : n ] into a max-heap
by calling M AX -H EAPIFY  in a bottom-up manner . Exercise 6.1-8 says that
the elements in the subarray A [ ⌊ n /2 ⌋  + 1 : n ] are all leaves of the tree, and so
each is a 1-element heap to begin with. B UILD -M AX -H EAP  goes through the
remaining nodes of the tree and runs M AX -H EAPIFY  on each one. Figure 6.3
shows an example of the action of B UILD -M AX -H EAP .
B UILD -M AX -H EAP ( A , n )
1 A.heap-size  = n
2 for  i  = ⌊ n /2 ⌋  downto  1
3 M AX -H EAPIFY ( A , i )
T o show why B UILD -M AX -H EAP  works correctly , we use the following
loop invariant:
At the start of each iteration of the for  loop of lines 2–3, each node
i  + 1, i  + 2, … , n  is the root of a max-heap.
W e need to show that this invariant is true prior to the first loop iteration,
that each iteration of the loop maintains the invariant, that the loop
terminates, and that the invariant provides a useful property to show
correctness when the loop terminates.
Page number: 216
Initialization:  Prior to the first iteration of the loop, i  = ⌊ n /2 ⌋ . Each node
⌊ n /2 ⌋  + 1, ⌊ n /2 ⌋  + 2, … , n  is a leaf and is thus the root of a trivial max-
heap.
Maintenance:  T o see that each iteration maintains the loop invariant,
observe that the children of node i  are numbered higher than i . By the
loop invariant, therefore, they are both roots of max-heaps. This is
precisely the condition required for the call M AX -H EAPIFY ( A , i ) to make
node i  a max-heap root. Moreover , the M AX -H EAPIFY  call preserves the
property that nodes i  + 1, i  + 2, … , n  are all roots of max-heaps.
Decrementing i  in the for  loop update reestablishes the loop invariant for
the next iteration.

Page number: 217
Figur e 6.3  The operation of B UILD -M AX -H EAP , showing the data structure before the call to
M AX -H EAPIFY  in line 3 of B UILD -M AX -H EAP . The node indexed by i  in each iteration is shown
in blue. (a)  A 10-element input array A  and the binary tree it represents. The loop index i  refers to
node 5 before the call M AX -H EAPIFY ( A , i ). (b)  The data structure that results. The loop index i  for
the next iteration refers to node 4. (c)–(e)  Subsequent iterations of the for  loop in B UILD -M AX -
H EAP . Observe that whenever M AX -H EAPIFY  is called on a node, the two subtrees of that node are
both max-heaps. (f)  The max-heap after B UILD -M AX -H EAP  finishes.
T ermination:  The loop makes exactly ⌊ n /2 ⌋  iterations, and so it terminates.
At termination, i  = 0. By the loop invariant, each node 1, 2, … , n  is the
root of a max-heap. In particular , node 1 is.
W e can compute a simple upper bound on the running time of B UILD -
M AX -H EAP  as follows. Each call to M AX -H EAPIFY  costs O (lg n ) time, and
B UILD -M AX -H EAP  makes O ( n ) such calls. Thus, the running time is O ( n  lg
n ). This upper bound, though correct, is not as tight as it can be.
W e can derive a tighter asymptotic bound by observing that the time for
M AX -H EAPIFY  to run at a node varies with the height of the node in the tree,
and that the heights of most nodes are small. Our tighter analysis relies on
the properties that an n -element heap has height ⌊ lg n ⌋  (see Exercise 6.1-2)
and at most ⌈ n /2h  + 1⌉  nodes of any height h  (see Exercise 6.3-4).
The time required by M AX -H EAPIFY  when called on a node of height h  is
O ( h ). Letting c  be the constant implicit in the asymptotic notation, we can
express the total cost of B UILD -M AX -H EAP  as being bounded from above by 
. As Exercise 6.3-2 shows, we have ⌈ n /2h  + 1⌉  ≥ 1/2 for 0 ≤ h
≤ ⌊ lg n ⌋ . Since ⌈ x ⌉  ≤ 2 x  for any x  ≥ 1/2, we have ⌈ n /2h  + 1⌉  ≤ n /2h. W e thus
obtain
Page number: 218
Hence, we can build a max-heap from an unordered array in linear time.
T o build a min-heap, use the procedure B UILD -M IN -H EAP , which is the
same as B UILD -M AX -H EAP  but with the call to M AX -H EAPIFY  in line 3
replaced by a call to M IN -H EAPIFY  (see Exercise 6.2-3). B UILD -M IN -H EAP
produces a min-heap from an unordered linear array in linear time.
Exer cises
6.3-1
Using Figure 6.3  as a model, illustrate the operation of B UILD -M AX -H EAP
on the array A  = 〈 5, 3, 17, 10, 84, 19, 6, 22, 9 〉 .
6.3-2
Show that ⌈ n /2h  + 1⌉  ≥ 1/2 for 0 ≤ h  ≤ ⌊ lg n ⌋ .
6.3-3
Why does the loop index i  in line 2 of B UILD -M AX -H EAP  decrease from
⌊ n /2 ⌋  to 1 rather than increase from 1 to ⌊ n /2 ⌋ ?
6.3-4
Show that there are at most ⌈ n /2h  + 1⌉  nodes of height h  in any n -element
heap.
Page number: 219
6.4      The heapsort algorithm
The heapsort algorithm, given by the procedure H EAPSOR T , starts by calling
the B UILD -M AX -H EAP  procedure to build a max-heap on the input array A [1
: n ]. Since the maximum element of the array is stored at the root A [1],
H EAPSOR T  can place it into its correct final position by exchanging it with
A [ n ]. If the procedure then discards node n  from the heap—and it can do so
by simply decrementing A.heap-size —the children of the root remain max-
heaps, but the new root element might violate the max-heap property . T o
restore the max-heap property , the procedure just calls M AX -H EAPIFY ( A , 1),
which leaves a max-heap in A [1 : n  – 1]. The H EAPSOR T  procedure then
repeats this process for the max-heap of size n  – 1 down to a heap of size 2.
(See Exercise 6.4-2 for a precise loop invariant.)
H EAPSOR T ( A , n )
1 B UILD -M AX -H EAP ( A , n )
2 for  i  = n  downto  2
3 exchange A [1] with A [ i ]
4 A.heap-size  = A.heap-size  – 1
5 M AX -H EAPIFY ( A , 1)
Figure 6.4  shows an example of the operation of H EAPSOR T  after line 1
has built the initial max-heap. The figure shows the max-heap before the
first iteration of the for  loop of lines 2–5 and after each iteration.
Page number: 220
Figur e 6.4  The operation of H EAPSOR T . (a)  The max-heap data structure just after B UILD -M AX -
H EAP  has built it in line 1. (b)–(j)  The max-heap just after each call of M AX -H EAPIFY  in line 5,
showing the value of i  at that time. Only blue nodes remain in the heap. T an nodes contain the lar gest
values in the array , in sorted order . (k)  The resulting sorted array A .
The H EAPSOR T  procedure takes O ( n  lg n ) time, since the call to B UILD -
M AX -H EAP  takes O ( n ) time and each of the n  – 1 calls to M AX -H EAPIFY
takes O (lg n ) time.
Exer cises
6.4-1
Page number: 221
Using Figure 6.4  as a model, illustrate the operation of H EAPSOR T  on the
array A  = 〈 5, 13, 2, 25, 7, 17, 20, 8, 4 〉 .
6.4-2
Ar gue the correctness of H EAPSOR T  using the following loop invariant:
At the start of each iteration of the for  loop of lines 2–5, the
subarray A [1 : i ] is a max-heap containing the i  smallest elements
of A [1 : n ], and the subarray A [ i  + 1 : n ] contains the n  – i  lar gest
elements of A [1 : n ], sorted.
6.4-3
What is the running time of H EAPSOR T  on an array A  of length n  that is
already sorted in increasing order? How about if the array is already sorted
in decreasing order?
6.4-4
Show that the worst-case running time of H EAPSOR T  is Ω( n  lg n ).
★  6.4-5
Show that when all the elements of A  are distinct, the best-case running
time of H EAPSOR T  is Ω( n  lg n ).
6.5      Priority queues
In Chapter 8 , we will see that any comparison-based sorting algorithm
requires Ω( n  lg n ) comparisons and hence Ω( n  lg n ) time. Therefore,
heapsort is asymptotically optimal among comparison-based sorting
algorithms. Y et, a good implementation of quicksort, presented in Chapter
7 , usually beats it in practice. Nevertheless, the heap data structure itself has
many uses. In this section, we present one of the most popular applications
of a heap: as an ef ficient priority queue. As with heaps, priority queues
come in two forms: max-priority queues and min-priority queues. W e’ll
focus here on how to implement max-priority queues, which are in turn
based on max-heaps. Exercise 6.5-3 asks you to write the procedures for
min-priority queues.
A priority queue  is a data structure for maintaining a set S  of elements,
each with an associated value called a key . A max-priority queue  supports
Page number: 222
the following operations:
I NSER T ( S , x , k ) inserts the element x  with key k  into the set S , which is
equivalent to the operation S  = S  ⋃  { x }.
M AXIMUM ( S ) returns the element of S  with the lar gest key .
E XTRACT -M AX ( S ) removes and returns the element of S  with the lar gest key .
I NCREASE -K EY ( S , x , k ) increases the value of element x ’ s key to the new
value k , which is assumed to be at least as lar ge as x ’ s current key value.
Among their other applications, you can use max-priority queues to
schedule jobs on a computer shared among multiple users. The max-priority
queue keeps track of the jobs to be performed and their relative priorities.
When a job is finished or interrupted, the scheduler selects the highest-
priority job from among those pending by calling E XTRACT -M AX . The
scheduler can add a new job to the queue at any time by calling I NSER T .
Alternatively , a min-priority queue  supports the operations I NSER T ,
M INIMUM , E XTRACT -M IN , and D ECREASE -K EY . A min-priority queue can be
used in an event-driven simulator . The items in the queue are events to be
simulated, each with an associated time of occurrence that serves as its key .
The events must be simulated in order of their time of occurrence, because
the simulation of an event can cause other events to be simulated in the
future. The simulation program calls E XTRACT -M IN  at each step to choose
the next event to simulate. As new events are produced, the simulator
inserts them into the min-priority queue by calling I NSER T . W e’ll see other
uses for min-priority queues, highlighting the D ECREASE -K EY  operation, in
Chapters 21  and 22 .
When you use a heap to implement a priority queue within a given
application, elements of the priority queue correspond to objects in the
application. Each object contains a key . If the priority queue is implemented
by a heap, you need to determine which application object corresponds to a
given heap element, and vice versa. Because the heap elements are stored in
an array , you need a way to map application objects to and from array
indices.
One way to map between application objects and heap elements uses
handles , which are additional information stored in the objects and heap
elements that give enough information to perform the mapping. Handles are
often implemented to be opaque to the surrounding code, thereby
Page number: 223
maintaining an abstraction barrier between the application and the priority
queue. For example, the handle within an application object might contain
the corresponding index into the heap array . But since only the code for the
priority queue accesses this index, the index is entirely hidden from the
application code. Because heap elements change locations within the array
during heap operations, an actual implementation of the priority queue,
upon relocating a heap element, must also update the array indices in the
corresponding handles. Conversely , each element in the heap might contain
a pointer to the corresponding application object, but the heap element
knows this pointer as only an opaque handle and the application maps this
handle to an application object. T ypically , the worst-case overhead for
maintaining handles is O (1) per access.
As an alternative to incorporating handles in application objects, you can
store within the priority queue a mapping from application objects to array
indices in the heap. The advantage of doing so is that the mapping is
contained entirely within the priority queue, so that the application objects
need no further embellishment. The disadvantage lies in the additional cost
of establishing and maintaining the mapping. One option for the mapping is
a hash table (see Chapter 1 1 ).1 The added expected time for a hash table to
map an object to an array index is just O (1), though the worst-case time can
be as bad as Θ( n ).
Let’ s see how to implement the operations of a max-priority queue using
a max-heap. In the previous sections, we treated the array elements as the
keys to be sorted, implicitly assuming that any satellite data moved with the
corresponding keys. When a heap implements a priority queue, we instead
treat each array element as a pointer to an object in the priority queue, so
that the object is analogous to the satellite data when sorting. W e further
assume that each such object has an attribute key , which determines where
in the heap the object belongs. For a heap implemented by an array A , we
refer to A [ i ]. key .
The procedure M AX -H EAP -M AXIMUM  on the facing page implements the
M AXIMUM  operation in Θ(1) time, and M AX -H EAP -E XTRACT -M AX
implements the operation E XTRACT -M AX . M AX -H EAP -E XTRACT -M AX  is
similar to the for  loop body (lines 3–5) of the H EAPSOR T  procedure. W e
implicitly assume that M AX -H EAPIFY  compares priority-queue objects based
on their key  attributes. W e also assume that when M AX -H EAPIFY  exchanges
elements in the array , it is exchanging pointers and also that it updates the
Page number: 224
mapping between objects and array indices. The running time of M AX -
H EAP -E XTRACT -M AX  is O (lg n ), since it performs only a constant amount of
work on top of the O (lg n ) time for M AX -H EAPIFY , plus whatever overhead
is incurred within M AX -H EAPIFY  for mapping priority-queue objects to array
indices.
The procedure M AX -H EAP -I NCREASE -K EY  on page 176 implements the
I NCREASE -K EY  operation. It first verifies that the new key k  will not cause
the key in the object x  to decrease, and if there is no problem, it gives x  the
new key value. The procedure then finds the index i  in the array
corresponding to object x , so that A [ i ] is x . Because increasing the key of
A [ i ] might violate the max-heap property , the procedure then, in a manner
reminiscent of the insertion loop (lines 5–7) of I NSER TION -S OR T  on page 19,
traverses a simple path from this node toward the root to find a proper place
for the newly increased key . As M AX -H EAP -I NCREASE -K EY  traverses this
path, it repeatedly compares an element’ s key to that of its parent,
exchanging pointers and continuing if the element’ s key is lar ger , and
terminating if the element’ s key is smaller , since the max-heap property
now holds. (See Exercise 6.5-7 for a precise loop invariant.) Like M AX -
H EAPIFY  when used in a priority queue, M AX -H EAP -I NCREASE -K EY  updates
the information that maps objects to array indices when array elements are
exchanged. Figure 6.5  shows an example of a M AX -H EAP -I NCREASE -K EY
operation. In addition to the overhead for mapping priority queue objects to
array indices, the running time of M AX -H EAP -I NCREASE -K EY  on an n -
element heap is O (lg n ), since the path traced from the node updated in line
3 to the root has length O (lg n ).
M AX -H EAP -M AXIMUM ( A )
1 if  A.heap-size  < 1
2 err or  “heap underflow”
3 r eturn  A [1]
M AX -H EAP -E XTRACT -M AX ( A )
1 max  = M AX -H EAP -M AXIMUM ( A )
2 A [1] = A [ A.heap-size ]
3 A.heap-size  = A.heap-size  – 1
4 M AX -H EAPIFY ( A , 1)
5 r eturn  max
Page number: 225
The procedure M AX -H EAP -I NSER T  on the next page implements the
I NSER T  operation. It takes as inputs the array A  implementing the max-heap,
the new object x  to be inserted into the max-heap, and the size n  of array A .
The procedure first verifies that the array has room for the new element. It
then expands the max-heap by adding to the tree a new leaf whose key is –
∞. Then it calls M AX -H EAP -I NCREASE -K EY  to set the key of this new
element to its correct value and maintain the max-heap property . The
running time of M AX -H EAP -I NSER T  on an n -element heap is O (lg n ) plus the
overhead for mapping priority queue objects to indices.
In summary , a heap can support any priority-queue operation on a set of
size n  in O (lg n ) time, plus the overhead for mapping priority queue objects
to array indices.
M AX -H EAP -I NCREASE -K EY ( A , x , k )
1 if  k  < x.key
2 err or  “new key is smaller than current key”
3 x.key  = k
4 find the index i  in array A  where object x  occurs
5 while  i  > 1 and A [P ARENT ( i )]. key  < A [ i ]. key
6 exchange A [ i ] with A [P ARENT ( i )], updating the information that maps priority queue
objects to array indices
7 i  = P ARENT ( i )
M AX -H EAP -I NSER T ( A , x , n )
1 if  A.heap-size  == n
2 err or  “heap overflow”
3 A.heap-size  = A.heap-size  + 1
4 k  = x.key
5 x.key  = –∞
6 A [ A.heap-size ] = x
7 map x  to index heap-size  in the array
8 M AX -H EAP -I NCREASE -K EY ( A , x , k )
Exer cises
6.5-1
Suppose that the objects in a max-priority queue are just keys. Illustrate the
operation of M AX -H EAP -E XTRACT -M AX  on the heap A  = 〈 15, 13, 9, 5, 12, 8,
7, 4, 0, 6, 2, 1 〉 .
6.5-2
Page number: 226
Suppose that the objects in a max-priority queue are just keys. Illustrate the
operation of M AX -H EAP -I NSER T ( A , 10) on the heap A  = 〈 15, 13, 9, 5, 12, 8,
7, 4, 0, 6, 2, 1 〉 .
6.5-3
W rite pseudocode to implement a min-priority queue with a min-heap by
writing the procedures M IN -H EAP -M INIMUM , M IN -H EAP -E XTRACT -M IN ,
M IN -H EAP -D ECREASE -K EY , and M IN -H EAP -I NSER T .
6.5-4
W rite pseudocode for the procedure M AX -H EAP -D ECREASE -K EY ( A , x , k ) in a
max-heap. What is the running time of your procedure?
Page number: 227
Figur e 6.5  The operation of M AX -H EAP -I NCREASE -K EY . Only the key of each element in the
priority queue is shown. The node indexed by i  in each iteration is shown in blue. (a)  The max-heap
of Figure 6.4(a)  with i  indexing the node whose key is about to be increased. (b)  This node has its
key increased to 15. (c)  After one iteration of the while  loop of lines 5–7, the node and its parent
have exchanged keys, and the index i  moves up to the parent. (d)  The max-heap after one more
iteration of the while  loop. At this point, A [P ARENT ( i )] ≥ A [ i ]. The max-heap property now holds
and the procedure terminates.
6.5-5
Why does M AX -H EAP -I NSER T  bother setting the key of the inserted object to
–∞ in line 5 given that line 8 will set the object’ s key to the desired value?
6.5-6
Professor Uriah suggests replacing the while  loop of lines 5–7 in M AX -
H EAP -I NCREASE -K EY  by a call to M AX -H EAPIFY . Explain the flaw in the
professor ’ s idea.
6.5-7
Page number: 228
Ar gue the correctness of M AX -H EAP -I NCREASE -K EY  using the following
loop invariant:
At the start of each iteration of the while  loop of lines 5–7:
a. If both nodes P ARENT ( i ) and L EFT ( i ) exist, then A [P ARENT ( i )]. key  ≥
A [L EFT ( i )]. key .
b. If both nodes P ARENT ( i ) and R IGHT ( i ) exist, then A [P ARENT ( i )]. key  ≥
A [R IGHT ( i )]. key .
c. The subarray A [1 : A.heap-size ] satisfies the max-heap property ,
except that there may be one violation, which is that A [ i ]. key  may be
greater than A [P ARENT ( i )]. key .
Y ou may assume that the subarray A [1 : A.heap-size ] satisfies the max-heap
property at the time M AX -H EAP -I NCREASE -K EY  is called.
6.5-8
Each exchange operation on line 6 of M AX -H EAP -I NCREASE -K EY  typically
requires three assignments, not counting the updating of the mapping from
objects to array indices. Show how to use the idea of the inner loop of
I NSER TION -S OR T  to reduce the three assignments to just one assignment.
6.5-9
Show how to implement a first-in, first-out queue with a priority queue.
Show how to implement a stack with a priority queue. (Queues and stacks
are defined in Section 10.1.3 .)
6.5-10
The operation M AX -H EAP -D ELETE ( A , x ) deletes the object x  from max-heap
A . Give an implementation of M AX -H EAP -D ELETE  for an n -element max-
heap that runs in O (lg n ) time plus the overhead for mapping priority queue
objects to array indices.
6.5-1 1
Give an O ( n  lg k )-time algorithm to mer ge k  sorted lists into one sorted list,
where n  is the total number of elements in all the input lists. ( Hint:  Use a
min-heap for k -way mer ging.)
Pr oblems
Page number: 229
6-1     Building a heap using insertion
One way to build a heap is by repeatedly calling M AX -H EAP -I NSER T  to insert
the elements into the heap. Consider the procedure B UILD -M AX -H EAP ′ on
the facing page. It assumes that the objects being inserted are just the heap
elements.
B UILD -M AX -H EAP ′ ( A , n )
1 A.heap-size  = 1
2 for  i  = 2 to  n
3 M AX -H EAP -I NSER T ( A , A [ i ], n )
a.  Do the procedures B UILD -M AX -H EAP  and B UILD -M AX -H EAP ′ always
create the same heap when run on the same input array? Prove that they
do, or provide a counterexample.
b.  Show that in the worst case, B UILD -M AX -H EAP ′ requires Θ( n  lg n ) time to
build an n -element heap.
6-2     Analysis of d-ary heaps
A d-ary heap  is like a binary heap, but (with one possible exception)
nonleaf nodes have d  children instead of two children. In all parts of this
problem, assume that the time to maintain the mapping between objects and
heap elements is O (1) per operation.
a.  Describe how to represent a d -ary heap in an array .
b.  Using Θ-notation, express the height of a d -ary heap of n  elements in
terms of n  and d .
c.  Give an ef ficient implementation of E XTRACT -M AX  in a d -ary max-heap.
Analyze its running time in terms of d  and n .
d.  Give an ef ficient implementation of I NCREASE -K EY  in a d -ary max-heap.
Analyze its running time in terms of d  and n .
e.  Give an ef ficient implementation of I NSER T  in a d -ary max-heap. Analyze
its running time in terms of d  and n .
6-3 Y oung tableaus
Page number: 230
An m  × n  Y oung tableau  is an m  × n  matrix such that the entries of each
row are in sorted order from left to right and the entries of each column are
in sorted order from top to bottom. Some of the entries of a Y oung tableau
may be ∞, which we treat as nonexistent elements. Thus, a Y oung tableau
can be used to hold r  ≤ mn  finite numbers.
a.  Draw a 4 × 4 Y oung tableau containing the elements {9, 16, 3, 2, 4, 8, 5,
14, 12}.
b.  Ar gue that an m  × n  Y oung tableau Y  is empty if Y  [1, 1] = ∞. Ar gue that
Y  is full (contains mn  elements) if Y  [ m , n ] < ∞.
c.  Give an algorithm to implement E XTRACT -M IN  on a nonempty m  × n
Y oung tableau that runs in O ( m  + n ) time. Y our algorithm should use a
recursive subroutine that solves an m  × n  problem by recursively solving
either an ( m  – 1) × n  or an m  × ( n  – 1) subproblem. ( Hint:  Think about
M AX -H EAPIFY .) Explain why your implementation of E XTRACT -M IN  runs
in O ( m  + n ) time.
d.  Show how to insert a new element into a nonfull m  × n  Y oung tableau in
O ( m  + n ) time.
e.  Using no other sorting method as a subroutine, show how to use an n  × n
Y oung tableau to sort n2 numbers in O ( n3) time.
f.  Give an O ( m  + n )-time algorithm to determine whether a given number is
stored in a given m  × n  Y oung tableau.
Chapter notes
The heapsort algorithm was invented by W illiams [ 456 ], who also described
how to implement a priority queue with a heap. The B UILD -M AX -H EAP
procedure was suggested by Floyd [ 145 ]. Schaf fer and Sedgewick [ 395 ]
showed that in the best case, the number of times elements move in the
heap during heapsort is approximately ( n /2) lg n  and that the average
number of moves is approximately n  lg n .
W e use min-heaps to implement min-priority queues in Chapters 15 , 21 ,
and 22 . Other , more complicated, data structures give better time bounds for
certain min-priority queue operations. Fredman and T arjan [ 156 ] developed
Fibonacci heaps, which support I NSER T  and D ECREASE -K EY  in O (1)
Page number: 231
amortized time (see Chapter 16 ). That is, the average worst-case running
time for these operations is O (1). Brodal, Lagogiannis, and T arjan [ 73 ]
subsequently devised strict Fibonacci heaps, which make these time bounds
the actual running times. If the keys are unique and drawn from the set {0,
1, … , n  – 1} of nonnegative integers, van Emde Boas trees [ 440 , 441 ]
support the operations I NSER T , D ELETE , S EARCH , M INIMUM , M AXIMUM ,
P REDECESSOR , and S UCCESSOR  in O (lg lg n ) time.
If the data are b -bit integers, and the computer memory consists of
addressable b -bit words, Fredman and W illard [ 157 ] showed how to
implement M INIMUM  in O (1) time and I NSER T  and E XTRACT -M IN  in 
time. Thorup [ 436 ] has improved the 
  bound to O (lg lg n ) time by
using randomized hashing, requiring only linear space.
An important special case of priority queues occurs when the sequence
of E XTRACT -M IN  operations is monotone , that is, the values returned by
successive E XTRACT -M IN  operations are monotonically increasing over
time. This case arises in several important applications, such as Dijkstra’ s
single-source shortest-paths algorithm, which we discuss in Chapter 22 , and
in discrete-event simulation. For Dijkstra’ s algorithm it is particularly
important that the D ECREASE -K EY  operation be implemented ef ficiently . For
the monotone case, if the data are integers in the range 1, 2, … , C , Ahuja,
Mehlhorn, Orlin, and T arjan [ 8 ] describe how to implement E XTRACT -M IN
and I NSER T  in O (lg C ) amortized time ( Chapter 16  presents amortized
analysis) and D ECREASE -K EY  in O (1) time, using a data structure called a
radix heap. The O (lg C ) bound can be improved to 
  using
Fibonacci heaps in conjunction with radix heaps. Cherkassky , Goldber g,
and Silverstein [ 90 ] further improved the bound to O (lg1/3+ ϵ C ) expected
time by combining the multilevel bucketing structure of Denardo and Fox
[ 1 12 ] with the heap of Thorup mentioned earlier . Raman [ 375 ] further
improved these results to obtain a bound of O (min {lg1/4+ ϵ C , lg1/3+ ϵ n }),
for any fixed ϵ  > 0.
Many other variants of heaps have been proposed. Brodal [ 72 ] surveys
some of these developments.
1 In Python, dictionaries are implemented with hash tables.
Page number: 232
7          Quicksort
The quicksort algorithm has a worst-case running time of Θ( n2) on an input
array of n  numbers. Despite this slow worst-case running time, quicksort is
often the best practical choice for sorting because it is remarkably ef ficient
on average: its expected running time is Θ( n  lg n ) when all numbers are
distinct, and the constant factors hidden in the Θ( n  lg n ) notation are small.
Unlike mer ge sort, it also has the advantage of sorting in place (see page
158), and it works well even in virtual-memory environments.
Our study of quicksort is broken into four sections. Section 7.1  describes
the algorithm and an important subroutine used by quicksort for
partitioning. Because the behavior of quicksort is complex, we’ll start with
an intuitive discussion of its performance in Section 7.2  and analyze it
precisely at the end of the chapter . Section 7.3  presents a randomized
version of quicksort. When all elements are distinct,1 this randomized
algorithm has a good expected running time and no particular input elicits
its worst-case behavior . (See Problem 7-2 for the case in which elements
may be equal.) Section 7.4  analyzes the randomized algorithm, showing
that it runs in Θ( n2) time in the worst case and, assuming distinct elements,
in expected O ( n  lg n ) time.
7.1      Description of quicksort
Quicksort, like mer ge sort, applies the divide-and-conquer method
introduced in Section 2.3.1 . Here is the three-step divide-and-conquer
process for sorting a subarray A [ p  : r ]:
Page number: 233
Divide  by partitioning (rearranging) the array A [ p  : r ] into two (possibly
empty) subarrays A [ p  : q  – 1] (the low side ) and A [ q  + 1 : r ] (the high
side ) such that each element in the low side of the partition is less than or
equal to the pivot  A [ q ], which is, in turn, less than or equal to each
element in the high side. Compute the index q  of the pivot as part of this
partitioning procedure.
Conquer  by calling quicksort recursively to sort each of the subarrays A [ p  :
q  – 1] and A [ q  + 1 : r ].
Combine  by doing nothing: because the two subarrays are already sorted,
no work is needed to combine them. All elements in A [ p  : q  – 1] are
sorted and less than or equal to A [ q ], and all elements in A [ q  + 1 : r ] are
sorted and greater than or equal to the pivot A [ q ]. The entire subarray A [ p
: r ] cannot help but be sorted!
The Q UICKSOR T  procedure implements quicksort. T o sort an entire n -
element array A [1 : n ], the initial call is Q UICKSOR T  ( A , 1, n ).
Q UICKSOR T ( A , p , r )
1 if  p  < r
2 //  Partition the subarray around the pivot, which ends up in A [ q ].
3 q  = P AR TITION ( A , p , r )
4 Q UICKSOR T ( A , p , q  – 1) //  recursively sort the low side
5 Q UICKSOR T ( A , q  + 1, r ) //  recursively sort the high side
Partitioning the array
The key to the algorithm is the P AR TITION  procedure on the next page,
which rearranges the subarray A [ p  : r ] in place, returning the index of the
dividing point between the two sides of the partition.
Figure 7.1  shows how P AR TITION  works on an 8-element array .
P AR TITION  always selects the element x  = A [ r ] as the pivot. As the procedure
runs, each element falls into exactly one of four regions, some of which
may be empty . At the start of each iteration of the for  loop in lines 3–6, the
regions satisfy certain properties, shown in Figure 7.2 . W e state these
properties as a loop invariant:
P AR TITION ( A , p , r )
Page number: 234
1 x  = A [ r ] //  the pivot
2 i  = p  – 1 //  highest index into the low side
3 for  j  = p  to  r  – 1 //  process each element other than the pivot
4 if  A [ j ] ≤ x //  does this element belong on the low side?
5 i  = i  + 1 //  index of a new slot in the low side
6 exchange A [ i ] with A [ j ] //  put this element there
7 exchange A [ i  + 1] with A [ r ] //  pivot goes just to the right of the low side
8 r eturn  i  + 1 //  new index of the pivot
At the beginning of each iteration of the loop of lines 3–6, for any
array index k , the following conditions hold:
1 . if p  ≤ k  ≤ i , then A [ k ] ≤ x  (the tan region of Figure 7.2 );
2 . if i  + 1 ≤ k  ≤ j  – 1, then A [ k ] > x  (the blue region);
3 . if k  = r , then A [ k ] = x  (the yellow region).
W e need to show that this loop invariant is true prior to the first
iteration, that each iteration of the loop maintains the invariant, that the loop
terminates, and that correctness follows from the invariant when the loop
terminates.
Initialization:  Prior to the first iteration of the loop, we have i  = p  – 1 and j
= p . Because no values lie between p  and i  and no values lie between i  + 1
and j  – 1, the first two conditions of the loop invariant are trivially
satisfied. The assignment in line 1 satisfies the third condition.
Maintenance:  As Figure 7.3  shows, we consider two cases, depending on
the outcome of the test in line 4. Figure 7.3(a)  shows what happens when
A [ j ] > x : the only action in the loop is to increment j . After j  has been
incremented, the second condition holds for A [ j  – 1] and all other entries
remain unchanged. Figure 7.3(b)  shows what happens when A [ j ] ≤ x : the
loop increments i , swaps A [ i ] and A [ j ], and then increments j . Because of
the swap, we now have that A [ i ] ≤ x , and condition 1 is satisfied.
Similarly , we also have that A [ j  – 1] > x , since the item that was swapped
into A [ j  – 1] is, by the loop invariant, greater than x .
T ermination:  Since the loop makes exactly r  – p  iterations, it terminates,
whereupon j  = r . At that point, the unexamined subarray A [ j  : r  – 1] is
empty , and every entry in the array belongs to one of the other three sets
described by the invariant. Thus, the values in the array have been
partitioned into three sets: those less than or equal to x  (the low side),
Page number: 235
those greater than x  (the high side), and a singleton set containing x  (the
pivot).
Figur e 7.1  The operation of P AR TITION  on a sample array . Array entry A [ r ] becomes the pivot
element x . T an array elements all belong to the low side of the partition, with values at most x . Blue
elements belong to the high side, with values greater than x . White elements have not yet been put
into either side of the partition, and the yellow element is the pivot x . (a)  The initial array and
variable settings. None of the elements have been placed into either side of the partition. (b)  The
value 2 is “swapped with itself” and put into the low side. (c)–(d)  The values 8 and 7 are placed into
to high side. (e)  The values 1 and 8 are swapped, and the low side grows. (f)  The values 3 and 7 are
swapped, and the low side grows. (g)–(h)  The high side of the partition grows to include 5 and 6, and
the loop terminates. (i)  Line 7 swaps the pivot element so that it lies between the two sides of the
partition, and line 8 returns the pivot’ s new index.
The final two lines of P AR TITION  finish up by swapping the pivot with
the leftmost element greater than x , thereby moving the pivot into its correct
place in the partitioned array , and then returning the pivot’ s new index. The
output of P AR TITION  now satisfies the specifications given for the divide
Page number: 236
step. In fact, it satisfies a slightly stronger condition: after line 3 of
Q UICKSOR T , A [ q ] is strictly less than every element of A [ q  + 1 : r ].
Figur e 7.2  The four regions maintained by the procedure P AR TITION  on a subarray A [ p  : r ]. The
tan values in A [ p  : i ] are all less than or equal to x , the blue values in A [ i  + 1 : j  – 1] are all greater
than x , the white values in A [ j  : r  – 1] have unknown relationships to x , and A [ r ] = x .
Figur e 7.3  The two cases for one iteration of procedure P AR TITION . (a)  If A [ j ] > x , the only action
is to increment j , which maintains the loop invariant. (b)  If A [ j ] ≤ x , index i  is incremented, A [ i ] and
A [ j ] are swapped, and then j  is incremented. Again, the loop invariant is maintained.
Exercise 7.1-3 asks you to show that the running time of P AR TITION  on a
subarray A [ p  : r ] of n  = r  – p  + 1 elements is Θ( n ).
Exer cises
7.1-1
Using Figure 7.1  as a model, illustrate the operation of P AR TITION  on the
array A  = 〈 13, 19, 9, 5, 12, 8, 7, 4, 21, 2, 6, 1 1〉 .
Page number: 237
7.1-2
What value of q  does P AR TITION  return when all elements in the subarray
A [ p  : r ] have the same value? Modify P AR TITION  so that q  = ⌊ ( p  + r )/2 ⌋
when all elements in the subarray A [ p  : r ] have the same value.
7.1-3
Give a brief ar gument that the running time of P AR TITION  on a subarray of
size n  is Θ( n ).
7.1-4
Modify Q UICKSOR T  to sort into monotonically decreasing order .
7.2      Performance of quicksort
The running time of quicksort depends on how balanced each partitioning
is, which in turn depends on which elements are used as pivots. If the two
sides of a partition are about the same size—the partitioning is balanced—
then the algorithm runs asymptotically as fast as mer ge sort. If the
partitioning is unbalanced, however , it can run asymptotically as slowly as
insertion sort. T o allow you to gain some intuition before diving into a
formal analysis, this section informally investigates how quicksort performs
under the assumptions of balanced versus unbalanced partitioning.
But first, let’ s briefly look at the maximum amount of memory that
quicksort requires. Although quicksort sorts in place according to the
definition on page 158, the amount of memory it uses—aside from the array
being sorted—is not constant. Since each recursive call requires a constant
amount of space on the runtime stack, outside of the array being sorted,
quicksort requires space proportional to the maximum depth of the
recursion. As we’ll see now , that could be as bad as Θ( n ) in the worst case.
W orst-case partitioning
The worst-case behavior for quicksort occurs when the partitioning
produces one subproblem with n  – 1 elements and one with 0 elements.
(See Section 7.4.1 .) Let us assume that this unbalanced partitioning arises in
each recursive call. The partitioning costs Θ( n ) time. Since the recursive
call on an array of size 0 just returns without doing anything, T  (0) = Θ(1),
and the recurrence for the running time is
Page number: 238
T  ( n ) = T  ( n  – 1) + T  (0) + Θ( n )
= T  ( n  – 1) + Θ( n ).
By summing the costs incurred at each level of the recursion, we obtain an
arithmetic series (equation (A.3) on page 1 141), which evaluates to Θ( n2).
Indeed, the substitution method can be used to prove that the recurrence T
( n ) = T  ( n  – 1) + Θ( n ) has the solution T  ( n ) = Θ( n2). (See Exercise 7.2-1.)
Thus, if the partitioning is maximally unbalanced at every recursive
level of the algorithm, the running time is Θ( n2). The worst-case running
time of quicksort is therefore no better than that of insertion sort. Moreover ,
the Θ( n2) running time occurs when the input array is already completely
sorted—a situation in which insertion sort runs in O ( n ) time.
Best-case partitioning
In the most even possible split, P AR TITION  produces two subproblems, each
of size no more than n /2, since one is of size ⌊ ( n  – 1)/2 ⌋  ≤ n /2 and one of
size ⌈ ( n  – 1)/2 ⌉  – 1 ≤ n /2. In this case, quicksort runs much faster . An upper
bound on the running time can then be described by the recurrence
T  ( n ) = 2 T  ( n /2) + Θ( n ).
By case 2 of the master theorem (Theorem 4.1 on page 102), this recurrence
has the solution T  ( n ) = Θ( n  lg n ). Thus, if the partitioning is equally
balanced at every level of the recursion, an asymptotically faster algorithm
results.
Balanced partitioning
As the analyses in Section 7.4  will show , the average-case running time of
quicksort is much closer to the best case than to the worst case. By
appreciating how the balance of the partitioning af fects the recurrence
describing the running time, we can gain an understanding of why .
Suppose, for example, that the partitioning algorithm always produces a
9-to-1 proportional split, which at first blush seems quite unbalanced. W e
then obtain the recurrence
T  ( n ) = T  (9 n /10) + T  ( n /10) + Θ( n ),
on the running time of quicksort. Figure 7.4  shows the recursion tree for
this recurrence, where for simplicity the Θ( n ) driving function has been
Page number: 239
replaced by n , which won’ t af fect the asymptotic solution of the recurrence
(as Exercise 4.7-1 on page 1 18 justifies). Every level of the tree has cost n ,
until the recursion bottoms out in a base case at depth log10  n  = Θ(lg n ), and
then the levels have cost at most n . The recursion terminates at depth
log10/9  n  = Θ(lg n ). Thus, with a 9-to-1 proportional split at every level of
recursion, which intuitively seems highly unbalanced, quicksort runs in O ( n
lg n ) time—asymptotically the same as if the split were right down the
middle. Indeed, even a 99-to-1 split yields an O ( n  lg n ) running time. In
fact, any split of constant  proportionality yields a recursion tree of depth
Θ(lg n ), where the cost at each level is O ( n ). The running time is therefore
O ( n  lg n ) whenever the split has constant proportionality . The ratio of the
split af fects only the constant hidden in the O -notation.
Figur e 7.4  A recursion tree for Q UICKSOR T  in which P AR TITION  always produces a 9-to-1 split,
yielding a running time of O ( n  lg n ). Nodes show subproblem sizes, with per -level costs on the right.
Intuition for the average case
T o develop a clear notion of the expected behavior of quicksort, we must
assume something about how its inputs are distributed. Because quicksort
determines the sorted order using only comparisons between input
elements, its behavior depends on the relative ordering of the values in the
Page number: 240
array elements given as the input, not on the particular values in the array .
As in the probabilistic analysis of the hiring problem in Section 5.2 , assume
that all permutations of the input numbers are equally likely and that the
elements are distinct.
When quicksort runs on a random input array , the partitioning is highly
unlikely to happen in the same way at every level, as our informal analysis
has assumed. W e expect that some of the splits will be reasonably well
balanced and that some will be fairly unbalanced. For example, Exercise
7.2-6 asks you to show that about 80% of the time P AR TITION  produces a
split that is at least as balanced as 9 to 1, and about 20% of the time it
produces a split that is less balanced than 9 to 1.
Figur e 7.5 (a)  T wo levels of a recursion tree for quicksort. The partitioning at the root costs n  and
produces a “bad” split: two subarrays of sizes 0 and n  – 1. The partitioning of the subarray of size n  –
1 costs n  – 1 and produces a “good” split: subarrays of size ( n  – 1)/2 – 1 and ( n  – 1)/2. (b)  A single
level of a recursion tree that is well balanced. In both parts, the partitioning cost for the subproblems
shown with blue shading is Θ( n ). Y et the subproblems remaining to be solved in (a), shown with tan
shading, are no lar ger than the corresponding subproblems remaining to be solved in (b).
In the average case, P AR TITION  produces a mix of “good” and “bad”
splits. In a recursion tree for an average-case execution of P AR TITION , the
good and bad splits are distributed randomly throughout the tree. Suppose
for the sake of intuition that the good and bad splits alternate levels in the
tree, and that the good splits are best-case splits and the bad splits are worst-
case splits. Figure 7.5(a)  shows the splits at two consecutive levels in the
recursion tree. At the root of the tree, the cost is n  for partitioning, and the
subarrays produced have sizes n  – 1 and 0: the worst case. At the next level,
the subarray of size n  – 1 under goes best-case partitioning into subarrays of
size ( n  – 1)/2 – 1 and ( n  – 1)/2. Let’ s assume that the base-case cost is 1 for
the subarray of size 0.
The combination of the bad split followed by the good split produces
three subarrays of sizes 0, ( n  – 1)/2 – 1, and ( n  – 1)/2 at a combined
Page number: 241
partitioning cost of Θ( n ) + Θ( n  – 1) = Θ( n ). This situation is at most a
constant factor worse than that in Figure 7.5(b) , namely , where a single
level of partitioning produces two subarrays of size ( n  – 1)/2, at a cost of
Θ( n ). Y et this latter situation is balanced! Intuitively , the Θ( n  – 1) cost of
the bad split in Figure 7.5(a)  can be absorbed into the Θ( n ) cost of the good
split, and the resulting split is good. Thus, the running time of quicksort,
when levels alternate between good and bad splits, is like the running time
for good splits alone: still O ( n  lg n ), but with a slightly lar ger constant
hidden by the O -notation. W e’ll analyze the expected running time of a
randomized version of quicksort rigorously in Section 7.4.2 .
Exer cises
7.2-1
Use the substitution method to prove that the recurrence T  ( n ) = T  ( n  – 1) +
Θ( n ) has the solution T  ( n ) = Θ( n2), as claimed at the beginning of Section
7.2 .
7.2-2
What is the running time of Q UICKSOR T  when all elements of array A  have
the same value?
7.2-3
Show that the running time of Q UICKSOR T  is Θ( n2) when the array A
contains distinct elements and is sorted in decreasing order .
7.2-4
Banks often record transactions on an account in order of the times of the
transactions, but many people like to receive their bank statements with
checks listed in order by check number . People usually write checks in
order by check number , and merchants usually cash them with reasonable
dispatch. The problem of converting time-of-transaction ordering to check-
number ordering is therefore the problem of sorting almost-sorted input.
Explain persuasively why the procedure I NSER TION -S OR T  might tend to beat
the procedure Q UICKSOR T  on this problem.
7.2-5
Page number: 242
Suppose that the splits at every level of quicksort are in the constant
proportion α  to β , where α  + β  = 1 and 0 < α  ≤ β  < 1. Show that the
minimum depth of a leaf in the recursion tree is approximately log1/ α  n  and
that the maximum depth is approximately log1/ β  n . (Don’ t worry about
integer round-of f.)
7.2-6
Consider an array with distinct elements and for which all permutations of
the elements are equally likely . Ar gue that for any constant 0 < α  ≤ 1/2, the
probability is approximately 1 – 2 α  that P AR TITION  produces a split at least
as balanced as 1 – α  to α .
7.3      A randomized version of quicksort
In exploring the average-case behavior of quicksort, we have assumed that
all permutations of the input numbers are equally likely . This assumption
does not always hold, however , as, for example, in the situation laid out in
the premise for Exercise 7.2-4. Section 5.3  showed that judicious
randomization can sometimes be added to an algorithm to obtain good
expected performance over all inputs. For quicksort, randomization yields a
fast and practical algorithm. Many software libraries provide a randomized
version of quicksort as their algorithm of choice for sorting lar ge data sets.
In Section 5.3 , the R ANDOMIZED -H IRE -A SSIST ANT  procedure explicitly
permutes its input and then runs the deterministic H IRE -A SSIST ANT
procedure. W e could do the same for quicksort as well, but a dif ferent
randomization technique yields a simpler analysis. Instead of always using
A [ r ] as the pivot, a randomized version randomly chooses the pivot from
the subarray A [ p  : r ], where each element in A [ p  : r ] has an equal
probability of being chosen. It then exchanges that element with A [ r ] before
partitioning. Because the pivot is chosen randomly , we expect the split of
the input array to be reasonably well balanced on average.
The changes to P AR TITION  and Q UICKSOR T  are small. The new
partitioning procedure, R ANDOMIZED -P AR TITION , simply swaps before
performing the partitioning. The new quicksort procedure, R ANDOMIZED -
Q UICKSOR T , calls R ANDOMIZED -P AR TITION  instead of P AR TITION . W e’ll
analyze this algorithm in the next section.
Page number: 243
R ANDOMIZED -P AR TITION ( A , p , r )
1 i  = R ANDOM ( p , r )
2 exchange A [ r ] with A [ i ]
3 r eturn  P AR TITION ( A , p , r )
R ANDOMIZED -Q UICKSOR T ( A , p , r )
1 if  p  < r
2 q  = R ANDOMIZED -P AR TITION ( A , p , r )
3 R ANDOMIZED -Q UICKSOR T ( A , p , q  – 1)
4 R ANDOMIZED -Q UICKSOR T ( A , q  + 1, r )
Exer cises
7.3-1
Why do we analyze the expected running time of a randomized algorithm
and not its worst-case running time?
7.3-2
When R ANDOMIZED -Q UICKSOR T  runs, how many calls are made to the
random-number generator R ANDOM  in the worst case? How about in the
best case? Give your answer in terms of Θ-notation.
7.4      Analysis of quicksort
Section 7.2  gave some intuition for the worst-case behavior of quicksort
and for why we expect the algorithm to run quickly . This section analyzes
the behavior of quicksort more rigorously . W e begin with a worst-case
analysis, which applies to either Q UICKSOR T  or R ANDOMIZED -Q UICKSOR T ,
and conclude with an analysis of the expected running time of
R ANDOMIZED -Q UICKSOR T .
7.4.1    W orst-case analysis
W e saw in Section 7.2  that a worst-case split at every level of recursion in
quicksort produces a Θ( n2) running time, which, intuitively , is the worst-
case running time of the algorithm. W e now prove this assertion.
W e’ll use the substitution method (see Section 4.3 ) to show that the
running time of quicksort is O ( n2). Let T  ( n ) be the worst-case time for the
procedure Q UICKSOR T  on an input of size n . Because the procedure
Page number: 244
P AR TITION  produces two subproblems with total size n  – 1, we obtain the
recurrence
W e guess that T  ( n ) ≤ cn2 for some constant c  > 0. Substituting this guess
into recurrence (7.1) yields
T  ( n ) ≤max { cq2 + c ( n  – 1 – q )2 : 0 ≤ q  ≤ n  – 1} + Θ( n )
= c  · max { q2 + ( n  – 1 – q )2 : 0 ≤ q  ≤ n  – 1} + Θ( n ).
Let’ s focus our attention on the maximization. For q  = 0, 1, … , n  – 1,
we have
q2 + ( n  – 1 – q )2 = q2 + ( n  – 1)2 – 2 q ( n  – 1) + q2
= ( n  – 1)2 + 2 q ( q  – ( n  – 1))
≤( n  – 1)2
because q  ≤ n  – 1 implies that 2 q ( q  – ( n  – 1)) ≤ 0. Thus every term in the
maximization is bounded by ( n  – 1)2.
Continuing with our analysis of T  ( n ), we obtain
T  ( n ) ≤c ( n  – 1)2 + Θ( n )
≤cn2 – c (2 n  – 1) + Θ( n )
≤cn2,
by picking the constant c  lar ge enough that the c (2 n  – 1) term dominates the
Θ( n ) term. Thus T  ( n ) = O ( n2). Section 7.2  showed a specific case where
quicksort takes Ω( n2) time: when partitioning is maximally unbalanced.
Thus, the worst-case running time of quicksort is Θ( n2).
7.4.2    Expected running time
W e have already seen the intuition behind why the expected running time of
R ANDOMIZED -Q UICKSOR T  is O ( n  lg n ): if, in each level of recursion, the split
induced by R ANDOMIZED -P AR TITION  puts any constant fraction of the
elements on one side of the partition, then the recursion tree has depth Θ(lg
n ) and O ( n ) work is performed at each level. Even if we add a few new
levels with the most unbalanced split possible between these levels, the
total time remains O ( n  lg n ). W e can analyze the expected running time of
Page number: 245
R ANDOMIZED -Q UICKSOR T  precisely by first understanding how the
partitioning procedure operates and then using this understanding to derive
an O ( n  lg n ) bound on the expected running time. This upper bound on the
expected running time, combined with the Θ( n  lg n ) best-case bound we
saw in Section 7.2 , yields a Θ( n  lg n ) expected running time. W e assume
throughout that the values of the elements being sorted are distinct.
Running time and comparisons
The Q UICKSOR T  and R ANDOMIZED -Q UICKSOR T  procedures dif fer only in how
they select pivot elements. They are the same in all other respects. W e can
therefore analyze R ANDOMIZED -Q UICKSOR T  by considering the Q UICKSOR T
and P AR TITION  procedures, but with the assumption that pivot elements are
selected randomly from the subarray passed to R ANDOMIZED -P AR TITION .
Let’ s start by relating the asymptotic running time of Q UICKSOR T  to the
number of times elements are compared (all in line 4 of P AR TITION ),
understanding that this analysis also applies to R ANDOMIZED -Q UICKSOR T .
Note that we are counting the number of times that array elements  are
compared, not comparisons of indices.
Lemma 7.1
The running time of Q UICKSOR T  on an n -element array is O ( n  + X ), where X
is the number of element comparisons performed.
Proof    The running time of Q UICKSOR T  is dominated by the time spent in
the P AR TITION  procedure. Each time P AR TITION  is called, it selects a pivot
element, which is never included in any future recursive calls to Q UICKSOR T
and P AR TITION . Thus, there can be at most n  calls to P AR TITION  over the
entire execution of the quicksort algorithm. Each time Q UICKSOR T  calls
P AR TITION , it also recursively calls itself twice, so there are at most 2 n  calls
to the Q UICKSOR T  procedure itself.
One call to P AR TITION  takes O (1) time plus an amount of time that is
proportional to the number of iterations of the for  loop in lines 3–6. Each
iteration of this for  loop performs one comparison in line 4, comparing the
pivot element to another element of the array A . Therefore, the total time
spent in the for  loop across all executions is proportional to X . Since there
are at most n  calls to P AR TITION  and the time spent outside the for  loop is
Page number: 246
O (1) for each call, the total time spent in P AR TITION  outside of the for  loop
is O ( n ). Thus the total time for quicksort is O ( n  + X ).
▪
Our goal for analyzing R ANDOMIZED -Q UICKSOR T , therefore, is to
compute the expected value E [ X ] of the random variable X  denoting the
total number of comparisons performed in all calls to P AR TITION . T o do so,
we must understand when the quicksort algorithm compares two elements
of the array and when it does not. For ease of analysis, let’ s index the
elements of the array A  by their position in the sorted output, rather than
their position in the input. That is, although the elements in A  may start out
in any order , we’ll refer to them by z1 , z2 , … , zn , where z1  < z2  < ⋯  < zn ,
with strict inequality because we assume that all elements are distinct. W e
denote the set { zi , zi  + 1 , … , zj } by Zij .
The next lemma characterizes when two elements are compared.
Lemma 7.2
During the execution of R ANDOMIZED -Q UICKSOR T  on an array of n  distinct
elements z1  < z2  < ⋯  < zn , an element zi  is compared with an element zj ,
where i  < j , if and only if one of them is chosen as a pivot before any other
element in the set Zij . Moreover , no two elements are ever compared twice.
Proof    Let’ s look at the first time that an element x  ∈  Zij  is chosen as a
pivot during the execution of the algorithm. There are three cases to
consider . If x  is neither zi  nor zj —that is, zi  < x  < zj —then zi  and zj  are not
compared at any subsequent time, because they fall into dif ferent sides of
the partition around x . If x  = zi , then P AR TITION  compares zi  with every other
item in Zij . Similarly , if x  = zj , then P AR TITION  compares zj  with every other
item in Zij . Thus, zi  and zj  are compared if and only if the first element to be
chosen as a pivot from Zij  is either zi  or zj . In the latter two cases, where one
of zi  and zj  is chosen as a pivot, since the pivot is removed from future
comparisons, it is never compared again with the other element.
▪
As an example of this lemma, consider an input to quicksort of the
numbers 1 through 10 in some arbitrary order . Suppose that the first pivot
Page number: 247
element is 7. Then the first call to P AR TITION  separates the numbers into two
sets: {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6} and {8, 9, 10}. In the process, the pivot element 7 is
compared with all other elements, but no number from the first set (e.g., 2)
is or ever will be compared with any number from the second set (e.g., 9).
The values 7 and 9 are compared because 7 is the first item from Z7,9  to be
chosen as a pivot. In contrast, 2 and 9 are never compared because the first
pivot element chosen from Z2,9  is 7.
The next lemma gives the probability that two elements are compared.
Lemma 7.3
Consider an execution of the procedure R ANDOMIZED -Q UICKSOR T  on an
array of n  distinct elements z1  < z2  < ⋯  < zn . Given two arbitrary elements
zi  and zj  where i  < j , the probability that they are compared is 2/( j  – i  + 1).
Proof    Let’ s look at the tree of recursive calls that R ANDOMIZED -Q UICKSOR T
makes, and consider the sets of elements provided as input to each call.
Initially , the root set contains all the elements of Zij , since the root set
contains every element in A . The elements belonging to Zij  all stay together
for each recursive call of R ANDOMIZED -Q UICKSOR T  until P AR TITION  chooses
some element x  ∈  Zij  as a pivot. From that point on, the pivot x  appears in
no subsequent input set. The first time that R ANDOMIZED -S ELECT  chooses a
pivot x  ∈  Zij  from a set containing all the elements of Zij , each element in
Zij  is equally likely to be x  because the pivot is chosen uniformly at random.
Since | Zij | = j  – i  + 1, the probability is 1/( j  – i  + 1) that any given element in
Zij  is the first pivot chosen from Zij . Thus, by Lemma 7.2, we have
Pr { z i  is compared with z j } = Pr { z i  or z j  is the first pivot chosen from Z ij }
= Pr { z i  is the first pivot chosen from Z ij }
+ Pr { z j  is the first pivot chosen from Z ij }
=
,
where the second line follows from the first because the two events are
mutually exclusive.
▪
Page number: 248
W e can now complete the analysis of randomized quicksort.
Theorem 7.4
The expected running time of R ANDOMIZED -Q UICKSOR T  on an input of n
distinct elements is O ( n  lg n ).
Proof    The analysis uses indicator random variables (see Section 5.2 ). Let
the n  distinct elements be z1  < z2  < ⋯  < zn , and for 1 ≤ i  < j  ≤ n , define the
indicator random variable Xij  = I { zi  is compared with zj }. From Lemma 7.2,
each pair is compared at most once, and so we can express X  as follows:
By taking expectations of both sides and using linearity of expectation
(equation (C.24) on page 1 192) and Lemma 5.1 on page 130, we obtain
W e can evaluate this sum using a change of variables ( k  = j  – i ) and the
bound on the harmonic series in equation (A.9) on page 1 142:
Page number: 249
This bound and Lemma 7.1 allow us to conclude that the expected running
time of R ANDOMIZED -Q UICKSOR T  is O ( n  lg n ) (assuming that the element
values are distinct).
▪
Exer cises
7.4-1
Show that the recurrence
T  ( n ) = max { T  ( q ) + T  ( n  – q  – 1) : 0 ≤ q  ≤ n  – 1} + Θ( n )
has a lower bound of T  ( n ) = Ω ( n2).
7.4-2
Show that quicksort’ s best-case running time is Ω( n  lg n ).
7.4-3
Show that the expression q2 + ( n  – q  – 1)2 achieves its maximum value over
q  = 0, 1, … , n  – 1 when q  = 0 or q  = n  – 1.
7.4-4
Show that R ANDOMIZED -Q UICKSOR T ’ s expected running time is Ω( n  lg n ).
7.4-5
Coarsening the recursion, as we did in Problem 2-1 for mer ge sort, is a
common way to improve the running time of quicksort in practice. W e
modify the base case of the recursion so that if the array has fewer than k
Page number: 250
elements, the subarray is sorted by insertion sort, rather than by continued
recursive calls to quicksort. Ar gue that the randomized version of this
sorting algorithm runs in O ( nk  + n  lg( n / k )) expected time. How should you
pick k , both in theory and in practice?
★  7.4-6
Consider modifying the P AR TITION  procedure by randomly picking three
elements from subarray A [ p  : r ] and partitioning about their median (the
middle value of the three elements). Approximate the probability of getting
worse than an α -to-(1– α ) split, as a function of α  in the range 0 < α  < 1/2.
Pr oblems
7-1     Hoare partition correctness
The version of P AR TITION  given in this chapter is not the original
partitioning algorithm. Here is the original partitioning algorithm, which is
due to C. A. R. Hoare.
H OARE -P AR TITION ( A , p , r )
  1 x  = A [ p ]
  2 i  = p  – 1
  3 j  = r  + 1
  4 while  TRUE
  5 r epeat
  6 j  = j  – 1
  7 until  A [ j ] ≤ x
  8 r epeat
  9 i  = i  + 1
10 until  A [ i ] ≥ x
1 1 if  i  < j
12 exchange A [ i ] with A [ j ]
13 else r eturn  j
a.  Demonstrate the operation of H OARE -P AR TITION  on the array A  = 〈 13, 19,
9, 5, 12, 8, 7, 4, 1 1, 2, 6, 21 〉 , showing the values of the array and the
indices i  and j  after each iteration of the while  loop in lines 4–13.
b.  Describe how the P AR TITION  procedure in Section 7.1  dif fers from
H OARE -P AR TITION  when all elements in A [ p  : r ] are equal. Describe a
Page number: 251
practical advantage of H OARE -P AR TITION  over P AR TITION  for use in
quicksort.
The next three questions ask you to give a careful ar gument that the
procedure H OARE -P AR TITION  is correct. Assuming that the subarray A [ p  : r ]
contains at least two elements, prove the following:
c.  The indices i  and j  are such that the procedure never accesses an element
of A  outside the subarray A [ p  : r ].
d.  When H OARE -P AR TITION  terminates, it returns a value j  such that p  ≤ j  <
r .
e.  Every element of A [ p  : j ] is less than or equal to every element of A [ j  + 1
: r ] when H OARE -P AR TITION  terminates.
The P AR TITION  procedure in Section 7.1  separates the pivot value (originally
in A [ r ]) from the two partitions it forms. The H OARE -P AR TITION  procedure,
on the other hand, always places the pivot value (originally in A [ p ]) into
one of the two partitions A [ p  : j ] and A [ j  + 1 : r ]. Since p  ≤ j  < r , neither
partition is empty .
f.  Rewrite the Q UICKSOR T  procedure to use H OARE -P AR TITION .
7-2     Quicksort with equal element values
The analysis of the expected running time of randomized quicksort in
Section 7.4.2  assumes that all element values are distinct. This problem
examines what happens when they are not.
a.  Suppose that all element values are equal. What is randomized
quicksort’ s running time in this case?
b.  The P AR TITION  procedure returns an index q  such that each element of
A [ p  : q  – 1] is less than or equal to A [ q ] and each element of A [ q  + 1 : r ] is
greater than A [ q ]. Modify the P AR TITION  procedure to produce a
procedure P AR TITION ′ ( A , p , r ), which permutes the elements of A [ p  : r ]
and returns two indices q  and t , where p  ≤ q  ≤ t  ≤ r , such that
all elements of A [ q  : t ] are equal,
each element of A [ p  : q  – 1] is less than A [ q ], and
each element of A [ t  + 1 : r ] is greater than A [ q ].
Page number: 252
Like P AR TITION , your P AR TITION ′ procedure should take Θ( r  – p ) time.
c.  Modify the R ANDOMIZED -P AR TITION  procedure to call P AR TITION ′, and
name the new procedure R ANDOMIZED -P AR TITION ′. Then modify the
Q UICKSOR T  procedure to produce a procedure Q UICKSOR T ′ ( A , p , r ) that
calls R ANDOMIZED -P AR TITION ′ and recurses only on partitions where
elements are not known to be equal to each other .
d.  Using Q UICKSOR T ′, adjust the analysis in Section 7.4.2  to avoid the
assumption that all elements are distinct.
7-3     Alternative quicksort analysis
An alternative analysis of the running time of randomized quicksort focuses
on the expected running time of each individual recursive call to
R ANDOMIZED -Q UICKSOR T , rather than on the number of comparisons
performed. As in the analysis of Section 7.4.2 , assume that the values of the
elements are distinct.
a.  Ar gue that, given an array of size n , the probability that any particular
element is chosen as the pivot is 1/ n . Use this probability to define
indicator random variables Xi  = I { i th smallest element is chosen as the
pivot}. What is E [ Xi ]?
b.  Let T  ( n ) be a random variable denoting the running time of quicksort on
an array of size n . Ar gue that
c.  Show how to rewrite equation (7.2) as
d.  Show that

Page number: 253
for n  ≥ 2. ( Hint:  Split the summation into two parts, one summation for q
= 1, 2, … , ⌈ n /2 ⌉  – 1 and one summation for q  = ⌈ n /2 ⌉  , … , n  – 1.)
e.  Using the bound from equation (7.4), show that the recurrence in
equation (7.3) has the solution E [ T  ( n )] = O ( n  lg n ). ( Hint:  Show , by
substitution, that E [ T  ( n )] ≤ an  lg n  for suf ficiently lar ge n  and for some
positive constant a .)
7-4     Stooge sort
Professors Howard, Fine, and Howard have proposed a deceptively simple
sorting algorithm, named stooge sort in their honor , appearing on the
following page.
a.  Ar gue that the call S T OOGE -S OR T ( A , 1, n ) correctly sorts the array A [1 :
n ].
b.  Give a recurrence for the worst-case running time of S T OOGE -S OR T  and a
tight asymptotic (Θ-notation) bound on the worst-case running time.
c.  Compare the worst-case running time of S T OOGE -S OR T  with that of
insertion sort, mer ge sort, heapsort, and quicksort. Do the professors
deserve tenure?
S T OOGE -S OR T ( A , p , r )
1 if  A [ p ] > A [ r ]
2 exchange A [ p ] with A [ r ]
3 if  p  + 1 < r
4 k  = ⌊ ( r  – p  + 1)/3 ⌋ //  round down
5 S T OOGE -S OR T ( A , p , r  – k ) //  first two-thirds
6 S T OOGE -S OR T ( A , p  + k , r ) //  last two-thirds
7 S T OOGE -S OR T ( A , p , r  – k ) //  first two-thirds again
7-5 Stack depth for quicksort
The Q UICKSOR T  procedure of Section 7.1  makes two recursive calls to itself.
After Q UICKSOR T  calls P AR TITION , it recursively sorts the low side of the
partition and then it recursively sorts the high side of the partition. The
second recursive call in Q UICKSOR T  is not really necessary , because the
procedure can instead use an iterative control structure. This transformation
technique, called tail-recursion elimination , is provided automatically by
Page number: 254
good compilers. Applying tail-recursion elimination transforms Q UICKSOR T
into the TRE-Q UICKSOR T  procedure.
TRE-Q UICKSOR T ( A , p , r )
1 while  p  < r
2 //  Partition and then sort the low side.
3 q  = P AR TITION ( A , p , r )
4 TRE-Q UICKSOR T ( A , p , q  – 1)
5 p  = q  + 1
a.  Ar gue that TRE-Q UICKSOR T ( A , 1, n ) correctly sorts the array A [1 : n ].
Compilers usually execute recursive procedures by using a stack  that
contains pertinent information, including the parameter values, for each
recursive call. The information for the most recent call is at the top of the
stack, and the information for the initial call is at the bottom. When a
procedure is called, its information is pushed  onto the stack, and when it
terminates, its information is popped . Since we assume that array
parameters are represented by pointers, the information for each procedure
call on the stack requires O (1) stack space. The stack depth  is the maximum
amount of stack space used at any time during a computation.
b.  Describe a scenario in which TRE-Q UICKSOR T ’ s stack depth is Θ( n ) on an
n -element input array .
c.  Modify TRE-Q UICKSOR T  so that the worst-case stack depth is Θ(lg n ).
Maintain the O ( n  lg n ) expected running time of the algorithm.
7-6     Median-of-3 partition
One way to improve the R ANDOMIZED -Q UICKSOR T  procedure is to partition
around a pivot that is chosen more carefully than by picking a random
element from the subarray . A common approach is the median-of-3
method: choose the pivot as the median (middle element) of a set of 3
elements randomly selected from the subarray . (See Exercise 7.4-6.) For
this problem, assume that the n  elements in the input subarray A [ p  : r ] are
distinct and that n  ≥ 3. Denote the sorted version of A [ p  : r ] by z1 , z2 , … , zn .
Using the median-of-3 method to choose the pivot element x , define pi  = Pr
{ x  = zi }.
Page number: 255
a.  Give an exact formula for pi  as a function of n  and i  for i  = 2, 3, … , n  –
1. (Observe that p1  = pn  = 0.)
b.  By what amount does the median-of-3 method increase the likelihood of
choosing the pivot to be x  = z⌊ ( n  + 1)/2 ⌋ , the median of A [ p  : r ], compared
with the ordinary implementation? Assume that n  → ∞, and give the
limiting ratio of these probabilities.
c.  Suppose that we define a “good” split to mean choosing the pivot as x  =
zi , where n /3 ≤ i  ≤ 2 n /3. By what amount does the median-of-3 method
increase the likelihood of getting a good split compared with the ordinary
implementation? ( Hint:  Approximate the sum by an integral.)
d.  Ar gue that in the Ω( n  lg n ) running time of quicksort, the median-of-3
method af fects only the constant factor .
7-7     Fuzzy sorting of intervals
Consider a sorting problem in which you do not know the numbers exactly .
Instead, for each number , you know an interval on the real line to which it
belongs. That is, you are given n  closed intervals of the form [ ai , bi ], where
ai  ≤ bi . The goal is to fuzzy-sort  these intervals: to produce a permutation
〈 i1 , i2 , … , in〉  of the intervals such that for j  = 1, 2, … , n , there exist 
 satisfying c1  ≤ c2  ≤ ⋯  ≤ cn .
a.  Design a randomized algorithm for fuzzy-sorting n  intervals. Y our
algorithm should have the general structure of an algorithm that
quicksorts the left endpoints (the ai  values), but it should take advantage
of overlapping intervals to improve the running time. (As the intervals
overlap more and more, the problem of fuzzy-sorting the intervals
becomes progressively easier . Y our algorithm should take advantage of
such overlapping, to the extent that it exists.)
b.  Ar gue that your algorithm runs in Θ( n  lg n ) expected time in general, but
runs in Θ( n ) expected time when all of the intervals overlap (i.e., when
there exists a value x  such that x  ∈  [ ai , bi ] for all i ). Y our algorithm
should not be checking for this case explicitly , but rather , its performance
should naturally improve as the amount of overlap increases.
Page number: 256
Chapter notes
Quicksort was invented by Hoare [ 219 ], and his version of P AR TITION
appears in Problem 7-1. Bentley [ 51 , p. 1 17] attributes the P AR TITION
procedure given in Section 7.1  to N. Lomuto. The analysis in Section 7.4
based on an analysis due to Motwani and Raghavan [ 336 ]. Sedgewick [ 401 ]
and Bentley [ 51 ] provide good references on the details of implementation
and how they matter .
McIlroy [ 323 ] shows how to engineer a “killer adversary” that produces
an array on which virtually any implementation of quicksort takes Θ( n2)
time.
1 Y ou can enforce the assumption that the values in an array A  are distinct at the cost of Θ( n )
additional space and only constant overhead in running time by converting each input value A [ i ] to an
ordered pair ( A [ i ], i ) with ( A [ i ], i ) < ( A [ j ], j ) if A [ i ] < A [ j ] or if A [ i ] = A [ j ] and i  < j . There are also
more practical variants of quicksort that work well when elements are not distinct.
Page number: 257
8          Sorting in Linear T ime
W e have now seen a handful of algorithms that can sort n  numbers in O ( n  lg
n ) time. Whereas mer ge sort and heapsort achieve this upper bound in the
worst case, quicksort achieves it on average. Moreover , for each of these
algorithms, we can produce a sequence of n  input numbers that causes the
algorithm to run in Ω( n  lg n ) time.
These algorithms share an interesting property: the sorted or der they
determine is based only on comparisons between the input elements . W e
call such sorting algorithms comparison sorts . All the sorting algorithms
introduced thus far are comparison sorts.
In Section 8.1 , we’ll prove that any comparison sort must make Ω( n  lg
n ) comparisons in the worst case to sort n  elements. Thus, mer ge sort and
heapsort are asymptotically optimal, and no comparison sort exists that is
faster by more than a constant factor .
Sections 8.2 , 8.3 , and 8.4  examine three sorting algorithms—counting
sort, radix sort, and bucket sort—that run in linear time on certain types of
inputs. Of course, these algorithms use operations other than comparisons
to determine the sorted order . Consequently , the Ω( n  lg n ) lower bound does
not apply to them.
8.1      Lower bounds for sorting
A comparison sort uses only comparisons between elements to gain order
information about an input sequence 〈 a1 , a2 , … , an〉 . That is, given two
elements ai  and aj , it performs one of the tests ai  < aj , ai  ≤ aj , ai  = aj , ai  ≥ aj ,
Page number: 258
or ai  > aj  to determine their relative order . It may not inspect the values of
the elements or gain order information about them in any other way .
Since we are proving a lower bound, we assume without loss of
generality in this section that all the input elements are distinct. After all, a
lower bound for distinct elements applies when elements may or may not be
distinct. Consequently , comparisons of the form ai  = aj  are useless, which
means that we can assume that no comparisons for exact equality occur .
Moreover , the comparisons ai  ≤ aj , ai  ≥ aj , ai  > aj , and ai  < aj  are all
equivalent in that they yield identical information about the relative order of
ai  and aj . W e therefore assume that all comparisons have the form ai  ≤ aj .
Figur e 8.1  The decision tree for insertion sort operating on three elements. An internal node (shown
in blue) annotated by i  : j  indicates a comparison between a i  and a j . A leaf annotated by the
permutation 〈 π (1), π (2), … , π ( n )〉  indicates the ordering a π (1)  ≤ a π (2)  ≤ ⋯  ≤ a π ( n ) . The highlighted
path indicates the decisions made when sorting the input sequence 〈 a 1  = 6, a 2  = 8, a 3  = 5 〉 . Going left
from the root node, labeled 1:2, indicates that a 1  ≤ a 2 . Going right from the node labeled 2:3
indicates that a 2  > a 3 . Going right from the node labeled 1:3 indicates that a 1  > a 3 . Therefore, we
have the ordering a 3  ≤ a 1  ≤ a 2 , as indicated in the leaf labeled 〈 3, 1, 2 〉 . Because the three input
elements have 3! = 6 possible permutations, the decision tree must have at least 6 leaves.
The decision-tr ee model
W e can view comparison sorts abstractly in terms of decision trees. A
decision tree  is a full binary tree (each node is either a leaf or has both
children) that represents the comparisons between elements that are
performed by a particular sorting algorithm operating on an input of a given
size. Control, data movement, and all other aspects of the algorithm are
ignored. Figure 8.1  shows the decision tree corresponding to the insertion
Page number: 259
sort algorithm from Section 2.1  operating on an input sequence of three
elements.
A decision tree has each internal node annotated by i  : j  for some i  and j
in the range 1 ≤ i , j  ≤ n , where n  is the number of elements in the input
sequence. W e also annotate each leaf by a permutation 〈 π (1), π (2), … ,
π ( n )〉 . (See Section C.1  for background on permutations.) Indices in the
internal nodes and the leaves always refer to the original positions of the
array elements at the start of the sorting algorithm. The execution of the
comparison sorting algorithm corresponds to tracing a simple path from the
root of the decision tree down to a leaf. Each internal node indicates a
comparison ai  ≤ aj . The left subtree then dictates subsequent comparisons
once we know that ai  ≤ aj , and the right subtree dictates subsequent
comparisons when ai  > aj . Arriving at a leaf, the sorting algorithm has
established the ordering aπ (1)  ≤ aπ (2)  ≤ ⋯  ≤ aπ ( n ) . Because any correct
sorting algorithm must be able to produce each permutation of its input,
each of the n ! permutations on n  elements must appear as at least one of the
leaves of the decision tree for a comparison sort to be correct. Furthermore,
each of these leaves must be reachable from the root by a downward path
corresponding to an actual execution of the comparison sort. (W e call such
leaves “reachable.”) Thus, we consider only decision trees in which each
permutation appears as a reachable leaf.
A lower bound for the worst case
The length of the longest simple path from the root of a decision tree to any
of its reachable leaves represents the worst-case number of comparisons
that the corresponding sorting algorithm performs. Consequently , the worst-
case number of comparisons for a given comparison sort algorithm equals
the height of its decision tree. A lower bound on the heights of all decision
trees in which each permutation appears as a reachable leaf is therefore a
lower bound on the running time of any comparison sort algorithm. The
following theorem establishes such a lower bound.
Theorem 8.1
Any comparison sort algorithm requires Ω( n  lg n ) comparisons in the worst
case.
Page number: 260
Proof    From the preceding discussion, it suf fices to determine the height of
a decision tree in which each permutation appears as a reachable leaf.
Consider a decision tree of height h  with l  reachable leaves corresponding
to a comparison sort on n  elements. Because each of the n ! permutations of
the input appears as one or more leaves, we have n ! ≤ l . Since a binary tree
of height h  has no more than 2h leaves, we have
n ! ≤ l  ≤ 2h,
which, by taking logarithms, implies
h ≥ lg( n !) (since the lg function is monotonically increasing)
= Ω ( n  lg n ) (by equation (3.28) on page 67).
▪
Corollary 8.2
Heapsort and mer ge sort are asymptotically optimal comparison sorts.
Proof    The O ( n  lg n ) upper bounds on the running times for heapsort and
mer ge sort match the Ω( n  lg n ) worst-case lower bound from Theorem 8.1.
▪
Exer cises
8.1-1
What is the smallest possible depth of a leaf in a decision tree for a
comparison sort?
8.1-2
Obtain asymptotically tight bounds on lg( n !) without using Stirling’ s
approximation. Instead, evaluate the summation 
  using techniques
from Section A.2 .
8.1-3
Show that there is no comparison sort whose running time is linear for at
least half of the n ! inputs of length n . What about a fraction of 1/ n  of the
inputs of length n ? What about a fraction 1/2n?
8.1-4
Page number: 261
Y ou are given an n -element input sequence, and you know in advance that it
is partly sorted in the following sense. Each element initially in position i
such that i  mod 4 = 0 is either already in its correct position, or it is one
place away from its correct position. For example, you know that after
sorting, the element initially in position 12 belongs in position 1 1, 12, or 13.
Y ou have no advance information about the other elements, in positions i
where i  mod 4 ≠ 0. Show that an Ω( n  lg n ) lower bound on comparison-
based sorting still holds in this case.
8.2      Counting sort
Counting sort  assumes that each of the n  input elements is an integer in the
range 0 to k , for some integer k . It runs in Θ( n  + k ) time, so that when k  =
O ( n ), counting sort runs in Θ( n ) time.
Counting sort first determines, for each input element x , the number of
elements less than or equal to x . It then uses this information to place
element x  directly into its position in the output array . For example, if 17
elements are less than or equal to x , then x  belongs in output position 17.
W e must modify this scheme slightly to handle the situation in which
several elements have the same value, since we do not want them all to end
up in the same position.
The C OUNTING -S OR T  procedure on the facing page takes as input an
array A [1 : n ], the size n  of this array , and the limit k  on the nonnegative
integer values in A . It returns its sorted output in the array B [1 : n ] and uses
an array C  [0 : k ] for temporary working storage.
C OUNTING -S OR T ( A , n , k )
  1 let B [1 : n ] and C  [0 : k ] be new arrays
  2 for  i  = 0 to  k
  3 C  [ i ] = 0
  4 for  j  = 1 to  n
  5 C  [ A [ j ]] = C  [ A [ j ]] + 1
  6 //  C  [ i ] now contains the number of elements equal to i .
  7 for  i  = 1 to  k
  8 C  [ i ] = C  [ i ] + C  [ i  – 1]
  9 //  C  [ i ] now contains the number of elements less than or equal to i .
10 //  Copy A  to B , starting from the end of A .
1 1 for  j  = n  downto  1
12 B [ C  [ A [ j ]]] = A [ j ]
13 C  [ A [ j ]] = C  [ A [ j ]] – 1 //  to handle duplicate values
Page number: 262
14 r eturn  B
Figure 8.2  illustrates counting sort. After the for  loop of lines 2–3
initializes the array C  to all zeros, the for  loop of lines 4–5 makes a pass
over the array A  to inspect each input element. Each time it finds an input
element whose value is i , it increments C  [ i ]. Thus, after line 5, C  [ i ] holds
the number of input elements equal to i  for each integer i  = 0, 1, … , k .
Lines 7–8 determine for each i  = 0, 1, … , k  how many input elements are
less than or equal to i  by keeping a running sum of the array C .
Finally , the for  loop of lines 1 1–13 makes another pass over A , but in
reverse, to place each element A [ j ] into its correct sorted position in the
output array B . If all n  elements are distinct, then when line 1 1 is first
entered, for each A [ j ], the value C  [ A [ j ]] is the correct final position of A [ j ]
in the output array , since there are C  [ A [ j ]] elements less than or equal to
A [ j ]. Because the elements might not be distinct, the loop decrements C
[ A [ j ]] each time it places a value A [ j ] into B . Decrementing C  [ A [ j ]] causes
the previous element in A  with a value equal to A [ j ], if one exists, to go to
the position immediately before A [ j ] in the output array B .
How much time does counting sort require? The for  loop of lines 2–3
takes Θ( k ) time, the for  loop of lines 4–5 takes Θ( n ) time, the for  loop of
lines 7–8 takes Θ( k ) time, and the for  loop of lines 1 1–13 takes Θ( n ) time.
Thus, the overall time is Θ( k  + n ). In practice, we usually use counting sort
when we have k  = O ( n ), in which case the running time is Θ( n ).
Counting sort can beat the lower bound of Ω( n  lg n ) proved in Section
8.1  because it is not a comparison sort. In fact, no comparisons between
input elements occur anywhere in the code. Instead, counting sort uses the
actual values of the elements to index into an array . The Ω( n  lg n ) lower
bound for sorting does not apply when we depart from the comparison sort
model.
Page number: 263
Figur e 8.2  The operation of C OUNTING -S OR T  on an input array A [1 : 8], where each element of A
is a nonnegative integer no lar ger than k  = 5. (a)  The array A  and the auxiliary array C  after line 5. (b)
The array C  after line 8. (c)–(e)  The output array B  and the auxiliary array C  after one, two, and three
iterations of the loop in lines 1 1–13, respectively . Only the tan elements of array B  have been filled
in. (f)  The final sorted output array B .
An important property of counting sort is that it is stable : elements with
the same value appear in the output array in the same order as they do in the
input array . That is, it breaks ties between two elements by the rule that
whichever element appears first in the input array appears first in the output
array . Normally , the property of stability is important only when satellite
data are carried around with the element being sorted. Counting sort’ s
stability is important for another reason: counting sort is often used as a
subroutine in radix sort. As we shall see in the next section, in order for
radix sort to work correctly , counting sort must be stable.
Exer cises
8.2-1
Using Figure 8.2  as a model, illustrate the operation of C OUNTING -S OR T  on
the array A  = 〈 6, 0, 2, 0, 1, 3, 4, 6, 1, 3, 2 〉 .
8.2-2
Prove that C OUNTING -S OR T  is stable.
8.2-3
Page number: 264
Suppose that we were to rewrite the for  loop header in line 1 1 of the
C OUNTING -S OR T  as
1 1 for  j  = 1 to  n
Show that the algorithm still works properly , but that it is not stable. Then
rewrite the pseudocode for counting sort so that elements with the same
value are written into the output array in order of increasing index and the
algorithm is stable.
8.2-4
Prove the following loop invariant for C OUNTING -S OR T :
At the start of each iteration of the for  loop of lines 1 1–13, the last
element in A  with value i  that has not yet been copied into B
belongs in B [ C  [ i ]].
8.2-5
Suppose that the array being sorted contains only integers in the range 0 to
k  and that there are no satellite data to move with those keys. Modify
counting sort to use just the arrays A  and C , putting the sorted result back
into array A  instead of into a new array B .
8.2-6
Describe an algorithm that, given n  integers in the range 0 to k ,
preprocesses its input and then answers any query about how many of the n
integers fall into a range [ a  : b ] in O (1) time. Y our algorithm should use Θ( n
+ k ) preprocessing time.
8.2-7
Counting sort can also work ef ficiently if the input values have fractional
parts, but the number of digits in the fractional part is small. Suppose that
you are given n  numbers in the range 0 to k , each with at most d  decimal
(base 10) digits to the right of the decimal point. Modify counting sort to
run in Θ( n  + 10d k ) time.
8.3      Radix sort
Page number: 265
Radix sort  is the algorithm used by the card-sorting machines you now find
only in computer museums. The cards have 80 columns, and in each
column a machine can punch a hole in one of 12 places. The sorter can be
mechanically “programmed” to examine a given column of each card in a
deck and distribute the card into one of 12 bins depending on which place
has been punched. An operator can then gather the cards bin by bin, so that
cards with the first place punched are on top of cards with the second place
punched, and so on.
Figur e 8.3  The operation of radix sort on seven 3-digit numbers. The leftmost column is the input.
The remaining columns show the numbers after successive sorts on increasingly significant digit
positions. T an shading indicates the digit position sorted on to produce each list from the previous
one.
For decimal digits, each column uses only 10 places. (The other two
places are reserved for encoding nonnumeric characters.) A d -digit number
occupies a field of d  columns. Since the card sorter can look at only one
column at a time, the problem of sorting n  cards on a d -digit number
requires a sorting algorithm.
Intuitively , you might sort numbers on their most significant  (leftmost)
digit, sort each of the resulting bins recursively , and then combine the decks
in order . Unfortunately , since the cards in 9 of the 10 bins must be put aside
to sort each of the bins, this procedure generates many intermediate piles of
cards that you would have to keep track of. (See Exercise 8.3-6.)
Radix sort solves the problem of card sorting—counterintuitively—by
sorting on the least significant  digit first. The algorithm then combines the
cards into a single deck, with the cards in the 0 bin preceding the cards in
the 1 bin preceding the cards in the 2 bin, and so on. Then it sorts the entire
deck again on the second-least significant digit and recombines the deck in
a like manner . The process continues until the cards have been sorted on all
d  digits. Remarkably , at that point the cards are fully sorted on the d -digit
Page number: 266
number . Thus, only d  passes through the deck are required to sort. Figure
8.3  shows how radix sort operates on a “deck” of seven 3-digit numbers.
In order for radix sort to work correctly , the digit sorts must be stable.
The sort performed by a card sorter is stable, but the operator must be
careful not to change the order of the cards as they come out of a bin, even
though all the cards in a bin have the same digit in the chosen column.
In a typical computer , which is a sequential random-access machine, we
sometimes use radix sort to sort records of information that are keyed by
multiple fields. For example, we might wish to sort dates by three keys:
year , month, and day . W e could run a sorting algorithm with a comparison
function that, given two dates, compares years, and if there is a tie,
compares months, and if another tie occurs, compares days. Alternatively ,
we could sort the information three times with a stable sort: first on day (the
“least significant” part), next on month, and finally on year .
The code for radix sort is straightforward. The R ADIX -S OR T  procedure
assumes that each element in array A [1 : n ] has d  digits, where digit 1 is the
lowest-order digit and digit d  is the highest-order digit.
R ADIX -S OR T ( A , n , d )
1 for  i  = 1 to  d
2 use a stable sort to sort array A [1 : n ] on digit i
Although the pseudocode for R ADIX -S OR T  does not specify which stable
sort to use, C OUNTING -S OR T  is commonly used. If you use C OUNTING -S OR T
as the stable sort, you can make R ADIX -S OR T  a little more ef ficient by
revising C OUNTING -S OR T  to take a pointer to the output array as a parameter ,
having R ADIX -S OR T  preallocate this array , and alternating input and output
between the two arrays in successive iterations of the for  loop in R ADIX -
S OR T .
Lemma 8.3
Given n  d -digit numbers in which each digit can take on up to k  possible
values, R ADIX -S OR T  correctly sorts these numbers in Θ( d ( n  + k )) time if the
stable sort it uses takes Θ( n  + k ) time.
Proof    The correctness of radix sort follows by induction on the column
being sorted (see Exercise 8.3-3). The analysis of the running time depends
Page number: 267
on the stable sort used as the intermediate sorting algorithm. When each
digit lies in the range 0 to k  – 1 (so that it can take on k  possible values),
and k  is not too lar ge, counting sort is the obvious choice. Each pass over n
d -digit numbers then takes Θ( n  + k ) time. There are d  passes, and so the
total time for radix sort is Θ( d ( n  + k )).
▪
When d  is constant and k  = O ( n ), we can make radix sort run in linear
time. More generally , we have some flexibility in how to break each key
into digits.
Lemma 8.4
Given n b -bit numbers and any positive integer r  ≤ b , R ADIX -S OR T  correctly
sorts these numbers in Θ(( b / r )( n  + 2r)) time if the stable sort it uses takes
Θ( n  + k ) time for inputs in the range 0 to k .
Proof    For a value r  ≤ b , view each key as having d  = ⌈ b / r ⌉  digits of r  bits
each. Each digit is an integer in the range 0 to 2r – 1, so that we can use
counting sort with k  = 2r – 1. (For example, we can view a 32-bit word as
having four 8-bit digits, so that b  = 32, r  = 8, k  = 2r – 1 = 255, and d  = b / r  =
4.) Each pass of counting sort takes Θ( n  + k ) = Θ( n  + 2r) time and there are
d  passes, for a total running time of Θ( d ( n  + 2r)) = Θ(( b / r )( n  + 2r)).
▪
Given n  and b , what value of r  ≤ b  minimizes the expression ( b / r )( n  +
2r)? As r  decreases, the factor b / r  increases, but as r  increases so does 2r.
The answer depends on whether b  < ⌊ lg n ⌋ . If b  < ⌊ lg n ⌋ , then r  ≤ b  implies
( n  + 2r) = Θ( n ). Thus, choosing r  = b  yields a running time of ( b / b )( n  + 2b)
= Θ( n ), which is asymptotically optimal. If b  ≥ ⌊ lg n ⌋ , then choosing r  = ⌊ lg
n ⌋  gives the best running time to within a constant factor , which we can see
as follows.1 Choosing r  = ⌊ lg n ⌋  yields a running time of Θ( bn /lg n ). As r
increases above ⌊ lg n ⌋ , the 2r term in the numerator increases faster than the
r  term in the denominator , and so increasing r  above ⌊ lg n ⌋  yields a running
time of Ω( bn  / lg n ). If instead r  were to decrease below ⌊ lg n ⌋ , then the b / r
term increases and the n  + 2r term remains at Θ( n ).
Is radix sort preferable to a comparison-based sorting algorithm, such as
quicksort? If b  = O (lg n ), as is often the case, and r  ≈ lg n , then radix sort’ s
Page number: 268
running time is Θ( n ), which appears to be better than quicksort’ s expected
running time of Θ( n  lg n ). The constant factors hidden in the Θ-notation
dif fer , however . Although radix sort may make fewer passes than quicksort
over the n  keys, each pass of radix sort may take significantly longer .
Which sorting algorithm to prefer depends on the characteristics of the
implementations, of the underlying machine (e.g., quicksort often uses
hardware caches more ef fectively than radix sort), and of the input data.
Moreover , the version of radix sort that uses counting sort as the
intermediate stable sort does not sort in place, which many of the Θ( n  lg n )-
time comparison sorts do. Thus, when primary memory storage is at a
premium, an in-place algorithm such as quicksort could be the better
choice.
Exer cises
8.3-1
Using Figure 8.3  as a model, illustrate the operation of R ADIX -S OR T  on the
following list of English words: COW , DOG, SEA, RUG, ROW , MOB,
BOX, T AB, BAR, EAR, T AR, DIG, BIG, TEA, NOW , FOX.
8.3-2
Which of the following sorting algorithms are stable: insertion sort, mer ge
sort, heapsort, and quicksort? Give a simple scheme that makes any
comparison sort stable. How much additional time and space does your
scheme entail?
8.3-3
Use induction to prove that radix sort works. Where does your proof need
the assumption that the intermediate sort is stable?
8.3-4
Suppose that C OUNTING -S OR T  is used as the stable sort within R ADIX -S OR T .
If R ADIX -S OR T  calls C OUNTING -S OR T  d  times, then since each call of
C OUNTING -S OR T  makes two passes over the data (lines 4–5 and 1 1–13),
altogether 2 d  passes over the data occur . Describe how to reduce the total
number of passes to d  + 1.
8.3-5
Show how to sort n  integers in the range 0 to n3 – 1 in O ( n ) time.
Page number: 269
★  8.3-6
In the first card-sorting algorithm in this section, which sorts on the most
significant digit first, exactly how many sorting passes are needed to sort d -
digit decimal numbers in the worst case? How many piles of cards does an
operator need to keep track of in the worst case?
8.4      Bucket sort
Bucket sort  assumes that the input is drawn from a uniform distribution and
has an average-case running time of O ( n ). Like counting sort, bucket sort is
fast because it assumes something about the input. Whereas counting sort
assumes that the input consists of integers in a small range, bucket sort
assumes that the input is generated by a random process that distributes
elements uniformly and independently over the interval [0, 1). (See Section
C.2  for a definition of a uniform distribution.)
Bucket sort divides the interval [0, 1) into n  equal-sized subintervals, or
buckets , and then distributes the n  input numbers into the buckets. Since the
inputs are uniformly and independently distributed over [0, 1), we do not
expect many numbers to fall into each bucket. T o produce the output, we
simply sort the numbers in each bucket and then go through the buckets in
order , listing the elements in each.
The B UCKET -S OR T  procedure on the next page assumes that the input is
an array A [1 : n ] and that each element A [ i ] in the array satisfies 0 ≤ A [ i ] <
1. The code requires an auxiliary array B [0 : n  – 1] of linked lists (buckets)
and assumes that there is a mechanism for maintaining such lists. ( Section
10.2  describes how to implement basic operations on linked lists.) Figure
8.4  shows the operation of bucket sort on an input array of 10 numbers.
Page number: 270
Figur e 8.4  The operation of B UCKET -S OR T  for n  = 10. (a)  The input array A [1 : 10]. (b)  The array
B [0 : 9] of sorted lists (buckets) after line 7 of the algorithm, with slashes indicating the end of each
bucket. Bucket i  holds values in the half-open interval [ i /10, ( i  + 1)/10). The sorted output consists of
a concatenation of the lists B [0], B [1], … , B [9] in order .
B UCKET -S OR T ( A , n )
1 let B [0 : n  – 1] be a new array
2 for  i  = 0 to  n  – 1
3 make B [ i ] an empty list
4 for  i  = 1 to  n
5 insert A [ i ] into list B [ ⌊ n  · A [ i ] ⌋ ]
6 for  i  = 0 to  n  – 1
7 sort list B [ i ] with insertion sort
8 concatenate the lists B [0], B [1], … , B [ n  – 1] together in order
9 r eturn  the concatenated lists
T o see that this algorithm works, consider two elements A [ i ] and A [ j ].
Assume without loss of generality that A [ i ] ≤ A [ j ]. Since ⌊ n  · A [ i ] ⌋  ≤ ⌊ n  ·
A [ j ] ⌋ , either element A [ i ] goes into the same bucket as A [ j ] or it goes into a
bucket with a lower index. If A [ i ] and A [ j ] go into the same bucket, then the
for  loop of lines 6–7 puts them into the proper order . If A [ i ] and A [ j ] go into
dif ferent buckets, then line 8 puts them into the proper order . Therefore,
bucket sort works correctly .
T o analyze the running time, observe that, together , all lines except line
7 take O ( n ) time in the worst case. W e need to analyze the total time taken
by the n  calls to insertion sort in line 7.
Page number: 271
T o analyze the cost of the calls to insertion sort, let ni  be the random
variable denoting the number of elements placed in bucket B [ i ]. Since
insertion sort runs in quadratic time (see Section 2.2 ), the running time of
bucket sort is
W e now analyze the average-case running time of bucket sort, by
computing the expected value of the running time, where we take the
expectation over the input distribution. T aking expectations of both sides
and using linearity of expectation (equation (C.24) on page 1 192), we have
W e claim that
for i  = 0, 1, … , n  – 1. It is no surprise that each bucket i  has the same value
of 
 , since each value in the input array A  is equally likely to fall in any
bucket.
T o prove equation (8.3), view each random variable ni  as the number of
successes in n  Bernoulli trials (see Section C.4 ). Success in a trial occurs
when an element goes into bucket B [ i ], with a probability p  = 1/ n  of success
and q  = 1 – 1/ n  of failure. A binomial distribution counts ni , the number of
successes, in the n  trials. By equations (C.41) and (C.44) on pages 1 199–
1200, we have E [ ni ] = np  = n (1/ n ) = 1 and V ar [ ni ] = npq  = 1 – 1/ n .
Equation (C.31) on page 1 194 gives
= V ar [ n i ] + E2 [ n i ]
= (1 – 1/ n ) + 12
Page number: 272
= 2 – 1/ n ,
which proves equation (8.3). Using this expected value in equation (8.2),
we get that the average-case running time for bucket sort is Θ( n ) + n  · O (2 –
1/ n ) = Θ( n ).
Even if the input is not drawn from a uniform distribution, bucket sort
may still run in linear time. As long as the input has the property that the
sum of the squares of the bucket sizes is linear in the total number of
elements, equation (8.1) tells us that bucket sort runs in linear time.
Exer cises
8.4-1
Using Figure 8.4  as a model, illustrate the operation of B UCKET -S OR T  on the
array A  = 〈 .79, .13, .16, .64, .39, .20, .89, .53, .71, .42 〉 .
8.4-2
Explain why the worst-case running time for bucket sort is Θ( n2). What
simple change to the algorithm preserves its linear average-case running
time and makes its worst-case running time O ( n  lg n )?
8.4-3
Let X  be a random variable that is equal to the number of heads in two flips
of a fair coin. What is E [ X2]? What is E2 [ X ]?
8.4-4
An array A  of size n  > 10 is filled in the following way . For each element
A [ i ], choose two random variables xi  and yi  uniformly and independently
from [0, 1). Then set
Modify bucket sort so that it sorts the array A  in O ( n ) expected time.
★  8.4-5
Y ou are given n  points in the unit disk, pi  = ( xi , yi ), such that 
for i  = 1, 2, … , n . Suppose that the points are uniformly distributed, that is,
the probability of finding a point in any region of the disk is proportional to
the area of that region. Design an algorithm with an average-case running
Page number: 273
time of Θ( n ) to sort the n  points by their distances 
  from the
origin. ( Hint:  Design the bucket sizes in B UCKET -S OR T  to reflect the
uniform distribution of the points in the unit disk.)
★  8.4-6
A probability distribution function  P ( x ) for a random variable X  is defined
by P ( x ) = Pr { X  ≤ x }. Suppose that you draw a list of n  random variables X1 ,
X2 , … , Xn  from a continuous probability distribution function P  that is
computable in O (1) time (given y  you can find x  such that P ( x ) = y  in O (1)
time). Give an algorithm that sorts these numbers in linear average-case
time.
Pr oblems
8-1     Probabilistic lower bounds on comparison sorting
In this problem, you will prove a probabilistic Ω( n  lg n ) lower bound on the
running time of any deterministic or randomized comparison sort on n
distinct input elements. Y ou’ll begin by examining a deterministic
comparison sort A  with decision tree TA . Assume that every permutation of
A ’ s inputs is equally likely .
a.  Suppose that each leaf of TA  is labeled with the probability that it is
reached given a random input. Prove that exactly n ! leaves are labeled
1/ n ! and that the rest are labeled 0.
b.  Let D ( T ) denote the external path length of a decision tree T —the sum of
the depths of all the leaves of T . Let T  be a decision tree with k  > 1 leaves,
and let L T  and RT  be the left and right subtrees of T . Show that D ( T ) =
D ( L T ) + D ( RT ) + k .
c.  Let d ( k ) be the minimum value of D ( T ) over all decision trees T  with k  >
1 leaves. Show that d ( k ) = min { d ( i ) + d ( k  – i ) + k  : 1 ≤ i  ≤ k  – 1}. ( Hint:
Consider a decision tree T  with k  leaves that achieves the minimum. Let i0
be the number of leaves in L T  and k  – i0  the number of leaves in RT .)
d.  Prove that for a given value of k  > 1 and i  in the range 1 ≤ i  ≤ k  – 1, the
function i  lg i  + ( k  – i ) lg( k  – i ) is minimized at i  = k /2. Conclude that d ( k )
Page number: 274
= Ω ( k  lg k ).
e.  Prove that D ( TA ) = Ω ( n ! lg( n !)), and conclude that the average-case time
to sort n  elements is Ω( n  lg n ).
Now consider a randomized  comparison sort B . W e can extend the decision-
tree model to handle randomization by incorporating two kinds of nodes:
ordinary comparison nodes and “randomization” nodes. A randomization
node models a random choice of the form R ANDOM (1, r ) made by algorithm
B . The node has r  children, each of which is equally likely to be chosen
during an execution of the algorithm.
f.  Show that for any randomized comparison sort B , there exists a
deterministic comparison sort A  whose expected number of comparisons
is no more than those made by B .
8-2     Sorting in place in linear time
Y ou have an array of n  data records to sort, each with a key of 0 or 1. An
algorithm for sorting such a set of records might possess some subset of the
following three desirable characteristics:
1 . The algorithm runs in O ( n ) time.
2 . The algorithm is stable.
3 . The algorithm sorts in place, using no more than a constant amount
of storage space in addition to the original array .
a.  Give an algorithm that satisfies criteria 1 and 2 above.
b.  Give an algorithm that satisfies criteria 1 and 3 above.
c.  Give an algorithm that satisfies criteria 2 and 3 above.
d.  Can you use any of your sorting algorithms from parts (a)–(c) as the
sorting method used in line 2 of R ADIX -S OR T , so that R ADIX -S OR T  sorts n
records with b -bit keys in O ( bn ) time? Explain how or why not.
e.  Suppose that the n  records have keys in the range from 1 to k . Show how
to modify counting sort so that it sorts the records in place in O ( n  + k )
time. Y ou may use O ( k ) storage outside the input array . Is your algorithm
stable?
Page number: 275
8-3     Sorting variable-length items
a.  Y ou are given an array of integers, where dif ferent integers may have
dif ferent numbers of digits, but the total number of digits over all  the
integers in the array is n . Show how to sort the array in O ( n ) time.
b.  Y ou are given an array of strings, where dif ferent strings may have
dif ferent numbers of characters, but the total number of characters over
all the strings is n . Show how to sort the strings in O ( n ) time. (The desired
order is the standard alphabetical order: for example, a < ab < b .)
8-4     W ater jugs
Y ou are given n  red and n  blue water jugs, all of dif ferent shapes and sizes.
All the red jugs hold dif ferent amounts of water , as do all the blue jugs, and
you cannot tell from the size of a jug how much water it holds. Moreover ,
for every jug of one color , there is a jug of the other color that holds the
same amount of water .
Y our task is to group the jugs into pairs of red and blue jugs that hold the
same amount of water . T o do so, you may perform the following operation:
pick a pair of jugs in which one is red and one is blue, fill the red jug with
water , and then pour the water into the blue jug. This operation tells you
whether the red jug or the blue jug can hold more water , or that they have
the same volume. Assume that such a comparison takes one time unit. Y our
goal is to find an algorithm that makes a minimum number of comparisons
to determine the grouping. Remember that you may not directly compare
two red jugs or two blue jugs.
a.  Describe a deterministic algorithm that uses Θ( n2) comparisons to group
the jugs into pairs.
b.  Prove a lower bound of Ω( n  lg n ) for the number of comparisons that an
algorithm solving this problem must make.
c.  Give a randomized algorithm whose expected number of comparisons is
O ( n  lg n ), and prove that this bound is correct. What is the worst-case
number of comparisons for your algorithm?
8-5     A verage sorting
Page number: 276
Suppose that, instead of sorting an array , we just require that the elements
increase on average. More precisely , we call an n -element array A  k-sorted
if, for all i  = 1, 2, … , n  – k , the following holds:
a.  What does it mean for an array to be 1-sorted?
b.  Give a permutation of the numbers 1, 2, … , 10 that is 2-sorted, but not
sorted.
c.  Prove that an n -element array is k -sorted if and only if A [ i ] ≤ A [ i  + k ] for
all i  = 1, 2, … , n  – k .
d.  Give an algorithm that k -sorts an n -element array in O ( n  lg( n / k )) time.
W e can also show a lower bound on the time to produce a k -sorted array ,
when k  is a constant.
e.  Show how to sort a k -sorted array of length n  in O ( n  lg k ) time. ( Hint:
Use the solution to Exercise 6.5-1 1.)
f.  Show that when k  is a constant, k -sorting an n -element array requires Ω( n
lg n ) time. ( Hint:  Use the solution to part (e) along with the lower bound
on comparison sorts.)
8-6     Lower bound on merging sorted lists
The problem of mer ging two sorted lists arises frequently . W e have seen a
procedure for it as the subroutine M ERGE  in Section 2.3.1 . In this problem,
you will prove a lower bound of 2 n  – 1 on the worst-case number of
comparisons required to mer ge two sorted lists, each containing n  items.
First, you will show a lower bound of 2 n  – o ( n ) comparisons by using a
decision tree.
a.  Given 2 n  numbers, compute the number of possible ways to divide them
into two sorted lists, each with n  numbers.
b.  Using a decision tree and your answer to part (a), show that any
algorithm that correctly mer ges two sorted lists must perform at least 2 n  –
o ( n ) comparisons.
Page number: 277
Now you will show a slightly tighter 2 n  – 1 bound.
c.  Show that if two elements are consecutive in the sorted order and from
dif ferent lists, then they must be compared.
d.  Use your answer to part (c) to show a lower bound of 2 n  – 1 comparisons
for mer ging two sorted lists.
8-7     The 0-1 sorting lemma and columnsort
A compare-exchange  operation on two array elements A [ i ] and A [ j ], where
i  < j , has the form
C OMP ARE -E XCHANGE ( A , i , j )
1 if  A [ i ] > A [ j ]
2 exchange A [ i ] with A [ j ]
After the compare-exchange operation, we know that A [ i ] ≤ A [ j ].
An oblivious compare-exchange algorithm  operates solely by a
sequence of prespecified compare-exchange operations. The indices of the
positions compared in the sequence must be determined in advance, and
although they can depend on the number of elements being sorted, they
cannot depend on the values being sorted, nor can they depend on the result
of any prior compare-exchange operation. For example, the C OMP ARE -
E XCHANGE -I NSER TION -S OR T  procedure on the facing page shows a variation
of insertion sort as an oblivious compare-exchange algorithm. (Unlike the
I NSER TION -S OR T  procedure on page 19, the oblivious version runs in Θ( n2)
time in all cases.)
The 0-1 sorting lemma  provides a powerful way to prove that an
oblivious compare-exchange algorithm produces a sorted result. It states
that if an oblivious compare-exchange algorithm correctly sorts all input
sequences consisting of only 0s and 1s, then it correctly sorts all inputs
containing arbitrary values.
C OMP ARE -E XCHANGE -I NSER TION -S OR T ( A , n )
1 for  i  = 2 to  n
2 for  j  = i  – 1 downto  1
3 C OMP ARE -E XCHANGE ( A , j , j  + 1)
Page number: 278
Y ou will prove the 0-1 sorting lemma by proving its contrapositive: if an
oblivious compare-exchange algorithm fails to sort an input containing
arbitrary values, then it fails to sort some 0-1 input. Assume that an
oblivious compare-exchange algorithm X fails to correctly sort the array
A [1 : n ]. Let A [ p ] be the smallest value in A  that algorithm X puts into the
wrong location, and let A [ q ] be the value that algorithm X moves to the
location into which A [ p ] should have gone. Define an array B [1 : n ] of 0s
and 1s as follows:
a.  Ar gue that A [ q ] > A [ p ], so that B [ p ] = 0 and B [ q ] = 1.
b.  T o complete the proof of the 0-1 sorting lemma, prove that algorithm X
fails to sort array B  correctly .
Now you will use the 0-1 sorting lemma to prove that a particular
sorting algorithm works correctly . The algorithm, columnsort , works on a
rectangular array of n  elements. The array has r  rows and s  columns (so that
n  = rs ), subject to three restrictions:
r  must be even,
s  must be a divisor of r , and
r  ≥ 2 s2.
When columnsort completes, the array is sorted in column-major order :
reading down each column in turn, from left to right, the elements
monotonically increase.
Columnsort operates in eight steps, regardless of the value of n . The odd
steps are all the same: sort each column individually . Each even step is a
fixed permutation. Here are the steps:
1 . Sort each column.
2 . T ranspose the array , but reshape it back to r  rows and s  columns. In
other words, turn the leftmost column into the top r / s  rows, in order;
turn the next column into the next r / s  rows, in order; and so on.
3 . Sort each column.
Page number: 279
4 . Perform the inverse of the permutation performed in step 2.
5 . Sort each column.
6 . Shift the top half of each column into the bottom half of the same
column, and shift the bottom half of each column into the top half of
the next column to the right. Leave the top half of the leftmost
column empty . Shift the bottom half of the last column into the top
half of a new rightmost column, and leave the bottom half of this
new column empty .
7 . Sort each column.
8 . Perform the inverse of the permutation performed in step 6.
Figur e 8.5  The steps of columnsort. (a)  The input array with 6 rows and 3 columns. (This example
does not obey the r  ≥ 2 s2 requirement, but it works.) (b)  After sorting each column in step 1. (c)
After transposing and reshaping in step 2. (d)  After sorting each column in step 3. (e)  After
performing step 4, which inverts the permutation from step 2. (f)  After sorting each column in step 5.
(g)  After shifting by half a column in step 6. (h)  After sorting each column in step 7. (i)  After
performing step 8, which inverts the permutation from step 6. Steps 6–8 sort the bottom half of each
column with the top half of the next column. After step 8, the array is sorted in column-major order .
Y ou can think of steps 6–8 as a single step that sorts the bottom half of each
column and the top half of the next column. Figure 8.5  shows an example
of the steps of columnsort with r  = 6 and s  = 3. (Even though this example
violates the requirement that r  ≥ 2 s2, it happens to work.)
Page number: 280
c.  Ar gue that we can treat columnsort as an oblivious compare-exchange
algorithm, even if we do not know what sorting method the odd steps use.
Although it might seem hard to believe that columnsort actually sorts,
you will use the 0-1 sorting lemma to prove that it does. The 0-1 sorting
lemma applies because we can treat columnsort as an oblivious compare-
exchange algorithm. A couple of definitions will help you apply the 0-1
sorting lemma. W e say that an area of an array is clean  if we know that it
contains either all 0s or all 1s or if it is empty . Otherwise, the area might
contain mixed 0s and 1s, and it is dirty . From here on, assume that the input
array contains only 0s and 1s, and that we can treat it as an array with r
rows and s  columns.
d.  Prove that after steps 1–3, the array consists of clean rows of 0s at the
top, clean rows of 1s at the bottom, and at most s  dirty rows between
them. (One of the clean rows could be empty .)
e.  Prove that after step 4, the array , read in column-major order , starts with a
clean area of 0s, ends with a clean area of 1s, and has a dirty area of at
most s2 elements in the middle. (Again, one of the clean areas could be
empty .)
f.  Prove that steps 5–8 produce a fully sorted 0-1 output. Conclude that
columnsort correctly sorts all inputs containing arbitrary values.
g.  Now suppose that s  does not divide r . Prove that after steps 1–3, the array
consists of clean rows of 0s at the top, clean rows of 1s at the bottom, and
at most 2 s  –1 dirty rows between them. (Once again, one of the clean
areas could be empty .) How lar ge must r  be, compared with s , for
columnsort to correctly sort when s  does not divide r ?
h.  Suggest a simple change to step 1 that allows us to maintain the
requirement that r  ≥ 2 s2 even when s  does not divide r , and prove that
with your change, columnsort correctly sorts.
Chapter notes
The decision-tree model for studying comparison sorts was introduced by
Ford and Johnson [ 150 ]. Knuth’ s comprehensive treatise on sorting [ 261 ]
covers many variations on the sorting problem, including the information-
Page number: 281
theoretic lower bound on the complexity of sorting given here. Ben-Or [ 46 ]
studied lower bounds for sorting using generalizations of the decision-tree
model.
Knuth credits H. H. Seward with inventing counting sort in 1954, as
well as with the idea of combining counting sort with radix sort. Radix
sorting starting with the least significant digit appears to be a folk algorithm
widely used by operators of mechanical card-sorting machines. According
to Knuth, the first published reference to the method is a 1929 document by
L. J. Comrie describing punched-card equipment. Bucket sorting has been
in use since 1956, when the basic idea was proposed by Isaac and Singleton
[ 235 ].
Munro and Raman [ 338 ] give a stable sorting algorithm that performs
O ( n1+ ϵ) comparisons in the worst case, where 0 < ϵ  ≤ 1 is any fixed
constant. Although any of the O ( n  lg n )-time algorithms make fewer
comparisons, the algorithm by Munro and Raman moves data only O ( n )
times and operates in place.
The case of sorting n b -bit integers in o ( n  lg n ) time has been considered
by many researchers. Several positive results have been obtained, each
under slightly dif ferent assumptions about the model of computation and
the restrictions placed on the algorithm. All the results assume that the
computer memory is divided into addressable b -bit words. Fredman and
W illard [ 157 ] introduced the fusion tree data structure and used it to sort n
integers in O ( n  lg n /lg lg n ) time. This bound was later improved to 
 time by Andersson [ 17 ]. These algorithms require the use of
multiplication and several precomputed constants. Andersson, Hagerup,
Nilsson, and Raman [ 18 ] have shown how to sort n  integers in O ( n  lg lg n )
time without using multiplication, but their method requires storage that can
be unbounded in terms of n . Using multiplicative hashing, we can reduce
the storage needed to O ( n ), but then the O ( n  lg lg n ) worst-case bound on
the running time becomes an expected-time bound. Generalizing the
exponential search trees of Andersson [ 17 ], Thorup [ 434 ] gave an O ( n (lg lg
n )2)-time sorting algorithm that does not use multiplication or
randomization, and it uses linear space. Combining these techniques with
some new ideas, Han [ 207 ] improved the bound for sorting to O ( n  lg lg n  lg
lg lg n ) time. Although these algorithms are important theoretical
breakthroughs, they are all fairly complicated and at the present time seem
unlikely to compete with existing sorting algorithms in practice.
Page number: 282
The columnsort algorithm in Problem 8-7 is by Leighton [ 286 ].
1 The choice of r  = ⌊ lg n ⌋  assumes that n  > 1. If n  ≤ 1, there is nothing to sort.
Page number: 283
9          Medians and Order Statistics
The i th order statistic  of a set of n  elements is the i th smallest element. For
example, the minimum  of a set of elements is the first order statistic ( i  = 1),
and the maximum  is the n th order statistic ( i  = n ). A median , informally , is
the “halfway point” of the set. When n  is odd, the median is unique,
occurring at i  = ( n  + 1)/2. When n  is even, there are two medians, the lower
median  occurring at i  = n /2 and the upper median  occurring at i  = n /2 + 1.
Thus, regardless of the parity of n , medians occur at i  = ⌊ ( n  + 1)/2 ⌋  and i  =
⌈ ( n  + 1)/2 ⌉ . For simplicity in this text, however , we consistently use the
phrase “the median” to refer to the lower median.
This chapter addresses the problem of selecting the i th order statistic
from a set of n  distinct numbers. W e assume for convenience that the set
contains distinct numbers, although virtually everything that we do extends
to the situation in which a set contains repeated values. W e formally specify
the selection problem  as follows:
Input:  A set A  of n  distinct numbers1 and an integer i , with 1 ≤ i  ≤ n .
Output:  The element x  ∈  A  that is lar ger than exactly i  – 1 other elements
of A .
W e can solve the selection problem in O ( n  lg n ) time simply by sorting the
numbers using heapsort or mer ge sort and then outputting the i th element in
the sorted array . This chapter presents asymptotically faster algorithms.
Section 9.1  examines the problem of selecting the minimum and
maximum of a set of elements. More interesting is the general selection
problem, which we investigate in the subsequent two sections. Section 9.2
analyzes a practical randomized algorithm that achieves an O ( n ) expected
Page number: 284
running time, assuming distinct elements. Section 9.3  contains an algorithm
of more theoretical interest that achieves the O ( n ) running time in the worst
case.
9.1      Minimum and maximum
How many comparisons are necessary to determine the minimum of a set of
n  elements? T o obtain an upper bound of n  – 1 comparisons, just examine
each element of the set in turn and keep track of the smallest element seen
so far . The M INIMUM  procedure assumes that the set resides in array A [1 :
n ].
M INIMUM ( A , n )
1 min  = A [1]
2 for  i  = 2 to  n
3 if  min  > A [ i ]
4 min  = A [ i ]
5 r eturn  min
It’ s no more dif ficult to find the maximum with n  – 1 comparisons.
Is this algorithm for minimum the best we can do? Y es, because it turns
out that there’ s a lower bound of n  – 1 comparisons for the problem of
determining the minimum. Think of any algorithm that determines the
minimum as a tournament among the elements. Each comparison is a match
in the tournament in which the smaller of the two elements wins. Since
every element except the winner must lose at least one match, we can
conclude that n  – 1 comparisons are necessary to determine the minimum.
Hence the algorithm M INIMUM  is optimal with respect to the number of
comparisons performed.
Simultaneous minimum and maximum
Some applications need to find both the minimum and the maximum of a
set of n  elements. For example, a graphics program may need to scale a set
of ( x , y ) data to fit onto a rectangular display screen or other graphical
output device. T o do so, the program must first determine the minimum and
maximum value of each coordinate.
Page number: 285
Of course, we can determine both the minimum and the maximum of n
elements using Θ( n ) comparisons. W e simply find the minimum and
maximum independently , using n  – 1 comparisons for each, for a total of 2 n
– 2 = Θ( n ) comparisons.
Although 2 n  – 2 comparisons is asymptotically optimal, it is possible to
improve the leading constant. W e can find both the minimum and the
maximum using at most 3 ⌊ n /2 ⌋  comparisons. The trick is to maintain both
the minimum and maximum elements seen thus far . Rather than processing
each element of the input by comparing it against the current minimum and
maximum, at a cost of 2 comparisons per element, process elements in
pairs. Compare pairs of elements from the input first with each other , and
then compare the smaller with the current minimum and the lar ger to the
current maximum, at a cost of 3 comparisons for every 2 elements.
How you set up initial values for the current minimum and maximum
depends on whether n  is odd or even. If n  is odd, set both the minimum and
maximum to the value of the first element, and then process the rest of the
elements in pairs. If n  is even, perform 1 comparison on the first 2 elements
to determine the initial values of the minimum and maximum, and then
process the rest of the elements in pairs as in the case for odd n .
Let’ s count the total number of comparisons. If n  is odd, then 3 ⌊ n /2 ⌋
comparisons occur . If n  is even, 1 initial comparison occurs, followed by
another 3( n  – 2)/2 comparisons, for a total of 3 n /2 – 2. Thus, in either case,
the total number of comparisons is at most 3 ⌊ n /2 ⌋ .
Exer cises
9.1-1
Show that the second smallest of n  elements can be found with n  + ⌈ lg n ⌉  –
2 comparisons in the worst case. ( Hint:  Also find the smallest element.)
9.1-2
Given n  > 2 distinct numbers, you want to find a number that is neither the
minimum nor the maximum. What is the smallest number of comparisons
that you need to perform?
9.1-3
A racetrack can run races with five horses at a time to determine their
relative speeds. For 25 horses, it takes six races to determine the fastest
Page number: 286
horse, assuming transitivity (see page 1 159). What’ s the minimum number
of races it takes to determine the fastest three horses out of 25?
★  9.1-4
Prove the lower bound of ⌈ 3 n /2 ⌉  – 2 comparisons in the worst case to find
both the maximum and minimum of n  numbers. ( Hint:  Consider how many
numbers are potentially either the maximum or minimum, and investigate
how a comparison af fects these counts.)
9.2      Selection in expected linear time
The general selection problem—finding the i th order statistic for any value
of i —appears more dif ficult than the simple problem of finding a minimum.
Y et, surprisingly , the asymptotic running time for both problems is the
same: Θ( n ). This section presents a divide-and-conquer algorithm for the
selection problem. The algorithm R ANDOMIZED -S ELECT  is modeled after the
quicksort algorithm of Chapter 7 . Like quicksort it partitions the input array
recursively . But unlike quicksort, which recursively processes both sides of
the partition, R ANDOMIZED -S ELECT  works on only one side of the partition.
This dif ference shows up in the analysis: whereas quicksort has an expected
running time of Θ( n  lg n ), the expected running time of R ANDOMIZED -
S ELECT  is Θ( n ), assuming that the elements are distinct.
R ANDOMIZED -S ELECT  uses the procedure R ANDOMIZED -P AR TITION
introduced in Section 7.3 . Like R ANDOMIZED -Q UICKSOR T , it is a randomized
algorithm, since its behavior is determined in part by the output of a
random-number generator . The R ANDOMIZED -S ELECT  procedure returns the
i th smallest element of the array A [ p  : r ], where 1 ≤ i  ≤ r  – p  + 1.
R ANDOMIZED -S ELECT ( A , p , r , i )
1 if  p  == r
2 r eturn  A [ p ] //  1 ≤ i  ≤ r  – p  + 1 when p  == r  means that i  = 1
3 q  = R ANDOMIZED -P AR TITION ( A , p , r )
4 k  = q  – p  + 1
5 if  i  == k
6 r eturn  A [ q ] //  the pivot value is the answer
7 elseif  i  < k
8 r eturn  R ANDOMIZED -S ELECT ( A , p , q  – 1, i )
9 else r eturn  R ANDOMIZED -S ELECT ( A , q  + 1, r , i  – k )
Page number: 287
Figure 9.1  illustrates how the R ANDOMIZED -S ELECT  procedure works. Line 1
checks for the base case of the recursion, in which the subarray A [ p  : r ]
consists of just one element. In this case, i  must equal 1, and line 2 simply
returns A [ p ] as the i th smallest element. Otherwise, the call to R ANDOMIZED -
P AR TITION  in line 3 partitions the array A [ p  : r ] into two (possibly empty)
subarrays A [ p  : q  – 1] and A [ q  + 1 : r ] such that each element of A [ p  : q  – 1]
is less than or equal to A [ q ], which in turn is less than each element of A [ q  +
1 : r ]. (Although our analysis assumes that the elements are distinct, the
procedure still yields the correct result even if equal elements are present.)
As in quicksort, we’ll refer to A [ q ] as the pivot  element. Line 4 computes
the number k  of elements in the subarray A [ p  : q ], that is, the number of
elements in the low side of the partition, plus 1 for the pivot element. Line 5
then checks whether A [ q ] is the i th smallest element. If it is, then line 6
returns A [ q ]. Otherwise, the algorithm determines in which of the two
subarrays A [ p : q  – 1] and A [ q  + 1 : r ] the i th smallest element lies. If i  < k ,
then the desired element lies on the low side of the partition, and line 8
recursively selects it from the subarray . If i  > k , however , then the desired
element lies on the high side of the partition. Since we already know k
values that are smaller than the i th smallest element of A [ p  : r ]—namely ,
the elements of A [ p  : q ]—the desired element is the ( i  – k )th smallest
element of A [ q  + 1 : r ], which line 9 finds recursively . The code appears to
allow recursive calls to subarrays with 0 elements, but Exercise 9.2-1 asks
you to show that this situation cannot happen.
Page number: 288
Figur e 9.1  The action of R ANDOMIZED -S ELECT  as successive partitionings narrow the subarray
A [ p : r ], showing the values of the parameters p , r , and i  at each recursive call. The subarray A [ p  : r ]
in each recursive step is shown in tan, with the dark tan element selected as the pivot for the next
partitioning. Blue elements are outside A [ p  : r ]. The answer is the tan element in the bottom array ,
where p  = r  = 5 and i  = 1. The array designations A(0), A(1), … , A(5), the partitioning numbers, and
whether the partitioning is helpful are explained on the following page.
The worst-case running time for R ANDOMIZED -S ELECT  is Θ( n2), even to
find the minimum, because it could be extremely unlucky and always
partition around the lar gest remaining element before identifying the i th
smallest when only one element remains. In this worst case, each recursive
step removes only the pivot from consideration. Because partitioning n
elements takes Θ( n ) time, the recurrence for the worst-case running time is
the same as for Q UICKSOR T : T  ( n ) = T  ( n  – 1) + Θ( n ), with the solution T  ( n )
= Θ( n2). W e’ll see that the algorithm has a linear expected running time,
however , and because it is randomized, no particular input elicits the worst-
case behavior .
T o see the intuition behind the linear expected running time, suppose
that each time the algorithm randomly selects a pivot element, the pivot lies
somewhere within the second and third quartiles—the “middle half”—of
the remaining elements in sorted order . If the i th smallest element is less
than the pivot, then all the elements greater than the pivot are ignored in all
Page number: 289
future recursive calls. These ignored elements include at least the
uppermost quartile, and possibly more. Likewise, if the i th smallest element
is greater than the pivot, then all the elements less than the pivot—at least
the first quartile—are ignored in all future recursive calls. Either way ,
therefore, at least 1/4 of the remaining elements are ignored in all future
recursive calls, leaving at most 3/4 of the remaining elements in play :
residing in the subarray A [ p  : r ]. Since R ANDOMIZED -P AR TITION  takes Θ( n )
time on a subarray of n  elements, the recurrence for the worst-case running
time is T  ( n ) = T  (3 n /4) + Θ( n ). By case 3 of the master method (Theorem
4.1 on page 102), this recurrence has solution T  ( n ) = Θ( n ).
Of course, the pivot does not necessarily fall into the middle half every
time. Since the pivot is selected at random, the probability that it falls into
the middle half is about 1/2 each time. W e can view the process of selecting
the pivot as a Bernoulli trial (see Section C.4 ) with success equating to the
pivot residing in the middle half. Thus the expected number of trials needed
for success is given by a geometric distribution: just two trials on average
(equation (C.36) on page 1 197). In other words, we expect that half of the
partitionings reduce the number of elements still in play by at least 3/4 and
that half of the partitionings do not help as much. Consequently , the
expected number of partitionings at most doubles from the case when the
pivot always falls into the middle half. The cost of each extra partitioning is
less than the one that preceded it, so that the expected running time is still
Θ( n ).
T o make the above ar gument rigorous, we start by defining the random
variable A( j ) as the set of elements of A  that are still in play after j
partitionings (that is, within the subarray A [ p  : r ] after j  calls of
R ANDOMIZED -S ELECT ), so that A(0) consists of all the elements in A . Since
each partitioning removes at least one element—the pivot—from being in
play , the sequence | A(0)|, | A(1)|, | A(2)|, … strictly decreases. Set A( j –1) is in
play before the j  th partitioning, and set A( j ) remains in play afterward. For
convenience, assume that the initial set A(0) is the result of a 0th “dummy”
partitioning.
Let’ s call the j  th partitioning helpful  if | A( j )| ≤ (3/4)| A( j –1)|. Figure 9.1
shows the sets A( j ) and whether partitionings are helpful for an example
array . A helpful partitioning corresponds to a successful Bernoulli trial. The
Page number: 290
following lemma shows that a partitioning is at least as likely to be helpful
as not.
Lemma 9.1
A partitioning is helpful with probability at least 1/2.
Proof    Whether a partitioning is helpful depends on the randomly chosen
pivot. W e discussed the “middle half” in the informal ar gument above. Let’ s
more precisely define the middle half of an n -element subarray as all but the
smallest ⌈ n /4 ⌉  – 1 and greatest ⌈ n /4 ⌉  – 1 elements (that is, all but the first
⌈ n /4 ⌉  – 1 and last ⌈ n /4 ⌉  – 1 elements if the subarray were sorted). W e’ll
prove that if the pivot falls into the middle half, then the pivot leads to a
helpful partitioning, and we’ll also prove that the probability of the pivot
falling into the middle half is at least 1/2.
Regardless of where the pivot falls, either all the elements greater than it
or all the elements less than it, along with the pivot itself, will no longer be
in play after partitioning. If the pivot falls into the middle half, therefore, at
least ⌈ n /4 ⌉  – 1 elements less than the pivot or ⌈ n /4 ⌉  – 1 elements greater
than the pivot, plus the pivot, will no longer be in play after partitioning.
That is, at least ⌈ n /4 ⌉  elements will no longer be in play . The number of
elements remaining in play will be at most n  – ⌈ n /4 ⌉ , which equals ⌊ 3 n /4 ⌋
by Exercise 3.3-2 on page 70. Since ⌊ 3 n /4 ⌋  ≤ 3 n /4, the partitioning is
helpful.
T o determine a lower bound on the probability that a randomly chosen
pivot falls into the middle half, we determine an upper bound on the
probability that it does not. That probability is
Thus, the pivot has a probability of at least 1/2 of falling into the middle
half, and so the probability is at least 1/2 that a partitioning is helpful.
▪
W e can now bound the expected running time of R ANDOMIZED -S ELECT .
Page number: 291
Theorem 9.2
The procedure R ANDOMIZED -S ELECT  on an input array of n  distinct elements
has an expected running time of Θ( n ).
Proof    Since not every partitioning is necessarily helpful, let’ s give each
partitioning an index starting at 0 and denote by 〈 h0 , h1 , h2 , … , hm〉  the
sequence of partitionings that are helpful, so that the hk th partitioning is
helpful for k  = 0, 1, 2, … , m . Although the number m  of helpful
partitionings is a random variable, we can bound it, since after at most
⌈ log4/3  n ⌉  helpful partitionings, only one element remains in play . Consider
the dummy 0th partitioning as helpful, so that h0  = 0. Denote 
  by nk ,
where n0  = | A(0)| is the original problem size. Since the hk th partitioning is
helpful and the sizes of the sets A( j ) strictly decrease, we have 
 for k  = 1, 2, … , m . By iterating nk
≤ (3/4) nk –1 , we have that nk  ≤ (3/4)kn0  for k  = 0, 1, 2, … , m .
Figur e 9.2  The sets within each generation in the proof of Theorem 9.2. V ertical lines represent the
sets, with the height of each line indicating the size of the set, which equals the number of elements
in play . Each generation starts with a set 
 , which is the result of a helpful partitioning. These
sets are drawn in black and are at most 3/4 the size of the sets to their immediate left. Sets drawn in
orange are not the first within a generation. A generation may contain just one set. The sets in
generation k  are 
 , 
 . The sets 
  are defined so that 
. If the partitioning gets all the way to generation h m , set 
  has at most
one element in play .
Page number: 292
As Figure 9.2  depicts, we break up the sequence of sets A( j ) into
m  generations  consisting of consecutively partitioned sets, starting with the
result 
  of a helpful partitioning and ending with the last set 
before the next helpful partitioning, so that the sets in generation k  are 
 , 
. Then for each set of elements A( j ) in the k th generation,
we have that 
 .
Next, we define the random variable
Xk  = hk  + 1  – hk
for k  = 0, 1, 2, … , m  – 1. That is, Xk  is the number of sets in the k th
generation, so that the sets in the k th generation are 
 , 
.
By Lemma 9.1, the probability that a partitioning is helpful is at least
1/2. The probability is actually even higher , since a partitioning is helpful
even if the pivot does not fall into the middle half but the i th smallest
element happens to lie in the smaller side of the partitioning. W e’ll just use
the lower bound of 1/2, however , and then equation (C.36) gives that E [ Xk ]
≤ 2 for k  = 0, 1, 2, … , m  – 1.
Let’ s derive an upper bound on how many comparisons are made
altogether during partitioning, since the running time is dominated by the
comparisons. Since we are calculating an upper bound, assume that the
recursion goes all the way until only one element remains in play . The j  th
partitioning takes the set A( j –1) of elements in play , and it compares the
randomly chosen pivot with all the other | A( j –1)| – 1 elements, so that the j th
partitioning makes fewer than | A( j –1)| comparisons. The sets in the k th
generation have sizes 
 . Thus, the total number
of comparisons during partitioning is less than

Page number: 293
Since E [ Xk ] ≤ 2, we have that the expected total number of comparisons
during partitioning is less than
Since n0  is the size of the original array A , we conclude that the expected
number of comparisons, and thus the expected running time, for
R ANDOMIZED -S ELECT  is O ( n ). All n  elements are examined in the first call
of R ANDOMIZED -P AR TITION , giving a lower bound of Ω( n ). Hence the
expected running time is Θ( n ).
▪
Exer cises
9.2-1
Show that R ANDOMIZED -S ELECT  never makes a recursive call to a 0-length
array .
9.2-2
W rite an iterative version of R ANDOMIZED -S ELECT .
9.2-3
Suppose that R ANDOMIZED -S ELECT  is used to select the minimum element of
the array A  = 〈 2, 3, 0, 5, 7, 9, 1, 8, 6, 4 〉 . Describe a sequence of partitions
that results in a worst-case performance of R ANDOMIZED -S ELECT .
9.2-4
Page number: 294
Ar gue that the expected running time of R ANDOMIZED -S ELECT  does not
depend on the order of the elements in its input array A [ p  : r ]. That is, the
expected running time is the same for any permutation of the input array
A [ p  : r ]. ( Hint:  Ar gue by induction on the length n  of the input array .)
9.3      Selection in worst-case linear time
W e’ll now examine a remarkable and theoretically interesting selection
algorithm whose running time is Θ( n ) in the worst case. Although the
R ANDOMIZED -S ELECT  algorithm from Section 9.2  achieves linear expected
time, we saw that its running time in the worst case was quadratic. The
selection algorithm presented in this section achieves linear time in the
worst case, but it is not nearly as practical as R ANDOMIZED -S ELECT . It is
mostly of theoretical interest.
Like the expected linear -time R ANDOMIZED -S ELECT , the worst-case
linear -time algorithm S ELECT  finds the desired element by recursively
partitioning the input array . Unlike R ANDOMIZED -S ELECT , however ,
S ELECT  guarantees  a good split by choosing a provably good pivot when
partitioning the array . The cleverness in the algorithm is that it finds the
pivot recursively . Thus, there are two invocations of S ELECT : one to find a
good pivot, and a second to recursively find the desired order statistic.
The partitioning algorithm used by S ELECT  is like the deterministic
partitioning algorithm P AR TITION  from quicksort (see Section 7.1 ), but
modified to take the element to partition around as an additional input
parameter . Like P AR TITION , the P AR TITION -A ROUND  algorithm returns the
index of the pivot. Since it’ s so similar to P AR TITION , the pseudocode for
P AR TITION -A ROUND  is omitted.
The S ELECT  procedure takes as input a subarray A [ p  : r ] of n  = r  – p  + 1
elements and an integer i  in the range 1 ≤ i  ≤ n . It returns the i th smallest
element of A . The pseudocode is actually more understandable than it might
appear at first.
S ELECT ( A , p , r , i )
  1 while  ( r  – p  + 1) mod 5 ≠ 0
  2 for  j  = p  + 1 to  r //  put the minimum into A [ p ]
  3 if  A [ p ] > A [ j ]
  4 exchange A [ p ] with A [ j ]
  5 //  If we want the minimum of A [ p  : r ], we’re done.
Page number: 295
  6 if  i  == 1
  7 r eturn  A [ p ]
  8 //  Otherwise, we want the ( i  – 1)st element of A [ p  + 1 : r ].
  9 p  = p  + 1
10 i  = i  – 1
1 1 g  = ( r  – p  + 1)/5 //  number of 5-element groups
12 for  j  = p  to  p  + g  – 1 //  sort each group
13 sort 〈 A [ j ], A [ j  + g ], A [ j  + 2 g ], A [ j  + 3 g ], A [ j  + 4 g ]〉  in place
14 //  All group medians now lie in the middle fifth of A [ p  : r ].
15 //  Find the pivot x  recursively as the median of the group medians.
16 x  = S ELECT ( A , p  + 2 g , p  + 3 g  – 1, ⌈ g /2 ⌉ )
17 q  = P AR TITION -A ROUND ( A , p , r , x ) //  partition around the pivot
18 //  The rest is just like lines 3–9 of R ANDOMIZED -S ELECT .
19 k  = q  – p  + 1
20 if  i  == k
21 r eturn  A [ q ] //  the pivot value is the answer
22 elseif  i  < k
23 r eturn  S ELECT ( A , p , q  – 1, i )
24 else r eturn  S ELECT ( A , q  + 1, r , i  – k )
The pseudocode starts by executing the while  loop in lines 1–10 to
reduce the number r  – p  + 1 of elements in the subarray until it is divisible
by 5. The while  loop executes 0 to 4 times, each time rearranging the
elements of A [ p  : r ] so that A [ p ] contains the minimum element. If i  = 1,
which means that we actually want the minimum element, then the
procedure simply returns it in line 7. Otherwise, S ELECT  eliminates the
minimum from the subarray A [ p  : r ] and iterates to find the ( i  – 1)st element
in A [ p  + 1 : r ]. Lines 9–10 do so by incrementing p  and decrementing i . If
the while  loop completes all of its iterations without returning a result, the
procedure executes the core of the algorithm in lines 1 1–24, assured that the
number r  – p  + 1 of elements in A [ p  : r ] is evenly divisible by 5.
Page number: 296
Figur e 9.3  The relationships between elements (shown as circles) immediately after line 17 of the
selection algorithm S ELECT . There are g  = ( r  – p  + 1)/5 groups of 5 elements, each of which
occupies a column. For example, the leftmost column contains elements A [ p ], A [ p  + g ], A [ p  + 2 g ],
A [ p  + 3 g ], A [ p  + 4 g ], and the next column contains A [ p  + 1], A [ p  + g  + 1], A [ p  + 2 g  + 1], A [ p  + 3 g  +
1], A [ p  + 4 g  + 1]. The medians of the groups are red, and the pivot x  is labeled. Arrows go from
smaller elements to lar ger . The elements on the blue background are all known to be less than or
equal to x  and cannot fall into the high side of the partition around x . The elements on the yellow
background are known to be greater than or equal to x  and cannot fall into the low side of the
partition around x . The pivot x  belongs to both the blue and yellow regions and is shown on a green
background. The elements on the white background could lie on either side of the partition.
The next part of the algorithm implements the following idea, illustrated
in Figure 9.3 . Divide the elements in A [ p  : r ] into g  = ( r  – p  + 1)/5 groups of
5 elements each. The first 5-element group is
〈 A [ p ], A [ p  + g ], A [ p  + 2 g ], A [ p  + 3 g ], A [ p  + 4 g ]〉 ,
the second is
〈 A [ p  + 1], A [ p  + g  + 1], A [ p  + 2 g  + 1], A [ p  + 3 g  + 1], A [ p  + 4 g  + 1] 〉 ,
and so forth until the last, which is
〈 A [ p  + g  – 1], A [ p  + 2 g  – 1], A [ p  + 3 g  – 1], A [ p  + 4 g  – 1], A [ r ]〉 .
(Note that r  = p  + 5 g  – 1.) Line 13 puts each group in order using, for
example, insertion sort ( Section 2.1 ), so that for j  = p , p  + 1, … , p  + g  – 1,
we have
Page number: 297
A[ j ] ≤ A [ j  + g ] ≤ A [ j  + 2 g ] ≤ A [ j  + 3 g ] ≤ A [ j  + 4 g ].
Each vertical column in Figure 9.3  depicts a sorted group of 5 elements.
The median of each 5-element group is A [ j  + 2 g ], and thus all the 5-element
medians, shown in red, lie in the range A [ p  + 2 g  : p  + 3 g  – 1].
Next, line 16 determines the pivot x  by recursively calling S ELECT  to
find the median (specifically , the ⌈ g /2 ⌉ th smallest) of the g  group medians.
Line 17 uses the modified P AR TITION -A ROUND  algorithm to partition the
elements of A [ p  : r ] around x , returning the index q  of x , so that A [ q ] = x ,
elements in A [ p  : q ] are all at most x , and elements in A [ q  : r ] are greater
than or equal to x .
The remainder of the code mirrors that of R ANDOMIZED -S ELECT . If the
pivot x  is the i th lar gest, the procedure returns it. Otherwise, the procedure
recursively calls itself on either A [ p  : q  – 1] or A [ q  + 1 : r ], depending on
the value of i .
Let’ s analyze the running time of S ELECT  and see how the judicious
choice of the pivot x  plays into a guarantee on its worst-case running time.
Theorem 9.3
The running time of S ELECT  on an input of n  elements is Θ( n ).
Proof    Define T  ( n ) as the worst-case time to run S ELECT  on any input
subarray A [ p  : r ] of size at most n , that is, for which r  – p  + 1 ≤ n . By this
definition, T  ( n ) is monotonically increasing.
W e first determine an upper bound on the time spent outside the
recursive calls in lines 16, 23, and 24. The while  loop in lines 1–10
executes 0 to 4 times, which is O (1) times. Since the dominant time within
the loop is the computation of the minimum in lines 2–4, which takes Θ( n )
time, lines 1–10 execute in O (1) · Θ( n ) = O ( n ) time. The sorting of the 5-
element groups in lines 12–13 takes Θ( n ) time because each 5-element
group takes Θ(1) time to sort (even using an asymptotically inef ficient
sorting algorithm such as insertion sort), and there are g  elements to sort,
where n /5 – 1 < g  ≤ n /5. Finally , the time to partition in line 17 is Θ( n ), as
Exercise 7.1-3 on page 187 asks you to show . Because the remaining
bookkeeping only costs Θ(1) time, the total amount of time spent outside of
the recursive calls is O ( n ) + Θ( n ) + Θ( n ) + Θ(1) = Θ( n ).
Now let’ s determine the running time for the recursive calls. The
recursive call to find the pivot in line 16 takes T  ( g ) ≤ T  ( n /5) time, since g  ≤
Page number: 298
n /5 and T  ( n ) monotonically increases. Of the two recursive calls in lines 23
and 24, at most one is executed. But we’ll see that no matter which of these
two recursive calls to S ELECT  actually executes, the number of elements in
the recursive call turns out to be at most 7 n /10, and hence the worst-case
cost for lines 23 and 24 is at most T  (7 n /10). Let’ s now show that the
machinations with group medians and the choice of the pivot x  as the
median of the group medians guarantees this property .
Figure 9.3  helps to visualize what’ s going on. There are g  ≤ n /5 groups
of 5 elements, with each group shown as a column sorted from bottom to
top. The arrows show the ordering of elements within the columns. The
columns are ordered from left to right with groups to the left of x ’ s group
having a group median less than x  and those to the right of x ’ s group having
a group median greater than x . Although the relative order within each
group matters, the relative order among groups to the left of x ’ s column
doesn’ t really matter , and neither does the relative order among groups to
the right of x ’ s column. The important thing is that the groups to the left
have group medians less than x  (shown by the horizontal arrows entering x ),
and that the groups to the right have group medians greater than x  (shown
by the horizontal arrows leaving x ). Thus, the yellow region contains
elements that we know are greater than or equal to x , and the blue region
contains elements that we know are less than or equal to x .
These two regions each contain at least 3 g /2 elements. The number of
group medians in the yellow region is ⌊ g /2 ⌋  + 1, and for each group median,
two additional elements are greater than it, making a total of 3( ⌊ g /2 ⌋  + 1) ≥
3 g /2 elements. Similarly , the number of group medians in the blue region is
⌈ g /2 ⌉ , and for each group median, two additional elements are less than it,
making a total of 3 ⌈ g /2 ⌉  ≥ 3 g /2.
The elements in the yellow region cannot fall into the low side of the
partition around x , and those in the blue region cannot fall into the high
side. The elements in neither region—those lying on a white background—
could fall into either side of the partition. But since the low side of the
partition excludes the elements in the yellow region, and there are a total of
5 g  elements, we know that the low side of the partition can contain at most
5 g  – 3 g /2 = 7 g /2 ≤ 7 n /10 elements. Likewise, the high side of the partition
excludes the elements in the blue region, and a similar calculation shows
that it also contains at most 7 n /10 elements.
Page number: 299
All of which leads to the following recurrence for the worst-case
running time of S ELECT :
W e can show that T  ( n ) = O ( n ) by substitution.2 More specifically , we’ll
prove that T  ( n ) ≤ cn  for some suitably lar ge constant c  > 0 and all n  > 0.
Substituting this inductive hypothesis into the right-hand side of recurrence
(9.1) and assuming that n  ≥ 5 yields
T  ( n ) ≤ c ( n /5) + c (7 n /10) + Θ( n )
≤ 9 cn /10 + Θ( n )
= cn  – cn /10 + Θ( n )
≤ cn
if c  is chosen lar ge enough that c /10 dominates the upper -bound constant
hidden by the Θ( n ). In addition to this constraint, we can pick c  lar ge
enough that T  ( n ) ≤ cn  for all n  ≤ 4, which is the base case of the recursion
within S ELECT . The running time of S ELECT  is therefore O ( n ) in the worst
case, and because line 13 alone takes Θ( n ) time, the total time is Θ( n ).
▪
As in a comparison sort (see Section 8.1 ), S ELECT  and R ANDOMIZED -
S ELECT  determine information about the relative order of elements only by
comparing elements. Recall from Chapter 8  that sorting requires Ω( n  lg n )
time in the comparison model, even on average (see Problem 8-1). The
linear -time sorting algorithms in Chapter 8  make assumptions about the
type of the input. In contrast, the linear -time selection algorithms in this
chapter do not require any assumptions about the input’ s type, only that the
elements are distinct and can be pairwise compared according to a linear
order . The algorithms in this chapter are not subject to the Ω( n  lg n ) lower
bound, because they manage to solve the selection problem without sorting
all the elements. Thus, solving the selection problem by sorting and
indexing, as presented in the introduction to this chapter , is asymptotically
inef ficient in the comparison model.
Exer cises
9.3-1
Page number: 300
In the algorithm S ELECT , the input elements are divided into groups of 5.
Show that the algorithm works in linear time if the input elements are
divided into groups of 7 instead of 5.
9.3-2
Suppose that the preprocessing in lines 1–10 of S ELECT  is replaced by a
base case for n  ≥ n0 , where n0  is a suitable constant; that g  is chosen as ⌊ r  –
p  + 1)/5 ⌋ ; and that the elements in A [5 g  : n ] belong to no group. Show that
although the recurrence for the running time becomes messier , it still solves
to Θ( n ).
9.3-3
Show how to use S ELECT  as a subroutine to make quicksort run in O ( n  lg n )
time in the worst case, assuming that all elements are distinct.
Figur e 9.4  Professor Olay needs to determine the position of the east-west oil pipeline that
minimizes the total length of the north-south spurs.
★  9.3-4
Suppose that an algorithm uses only comparisons to find the i th smallest
element in a set of n  elements. Show that it can also find the i  – 1 smaller
elements and the n  – i  lar ger elements without performing any additional
comparisons.
9.3-5
Show how to determine the median of a 5-element set using only 6
comparisons.
Page number: 301
9.3-6
Y ou have a “black-box” worst-case linear -time median subroutine. Give a
simple, linear -time algorithm that solves the selection problem for an
arbitrary order statistic.
9.3-7
Professor Olay is consulting for an oil company , which is planning a lar ge
pipeline running east to west through an oil field of n  wells. The company
wants to connect a spur pipeline from each well directly to the main
pipeline along a shortest route (either north or south), as shown in Figure
9.4.  Given the x - and y -coordinates of the wells, how should the professor
pick an optimal location of the main pipeline to minimize the total length of
the spurs? Show how to determine an optimal location in linear time.
9.3-8
The k th quantiles  of an n -element set are the k  – 1 order statistics that
divide the sorted set into k  equal-sized sets (to within 1). Give an O ( n  lg k )-
time algorithm to list the k th quantiles of a set.
9.3-9
Describe an O ( n )-time algorithm that, given a set S  of n  distinct numbers
and a positive integer k  ≤ n , determines the k  numbers in S  that are closest
to the median of S .
9.3-10
Let X [1 : n ] and Y  [1 : n ] be two arrays, each containing n  numbers already
in sorted order . Give an O (lg n )-time algorithm to find the median of all 2 n
elements in arrays X  and Y . Assume that all 2 n  numbers are distinct.
Pr oblems
9-1     Largest i numbers in sorted order
Y ou are given a set of n  numbers, and you wish to find the i  lar gest in sorted
order using a comparison-based algorithm. Describe the algorithm that
implements each of the following methods with the best asymptotic worst-
case running time, and analyze the running times of the algorithms in terms
of n  and i .
Page number: 302
a.  Sort the numbers, and list the i  lar gest.
b.  Build a max-priority queue from the numbers, and call E XTRACT -M AX  i
times.
c.  Use an order -statistic algorithm to find the i th lar gest number , partition
around that number , and sort the i  lar gest numbers.
9-2     V ariant of randomized selection
Professor Mendel has proposed simplifying R ANDOMIZED -S ELECT  by
eliminating the check for whether i  and k  are equal. The simplified
procedure is S IMPLER -R ANDOMIZED -S ELECT .
S IMPLER -R ANDOMIZED -S ELECT ( A , p , r , i )
1 if  p  == r
2 r eturn  A [ p ] //  1 ≤ i  ≤ r  – p  + 1 means that i  = 1
3 q  = R ANDOMIZED -P AR TITION ( A , p , r )
4 k  = q  – p  + 1
5 if  i  ≤ k
6 r eturn  S IMPLER -R ANDOMIZED -S ELECT ( A , p , q , i )
7 else r eturn  S IMPLER -R ANDOMIZED -S ELECT ( A , q  + 1, r , i  –
k )
a.  Ar gue that in the worst case, S IMPLER -R ANDOMIZED -S ELECT  never
terminates.
b.  Prove that the expected running time of S IMPLER -R ANDOMIZED -S ELECT  is
still O ( n ).
9-3     W eighted median
Consider n  elements x1 , x2 , … , xn  with positive weights w1 , w2 , … , wn
such that 
 . The weighted (lower) median  is an element xk
satisfying
and
Page number: 303
For example, consider the following elements xi  and weights wi :
i 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
x i3 8 2 5 4 1 6
w i0.12 0.35 0.025 0.08 0.15 0.075 0.2
For these elements, the median is x5  = 4, but the weighted median is x7  = 6.
T o see why the weighted median is x7 , observe that the elements less than x7
are x1 , x3 , x4 , x5 , and x6 , and the sum w1  + w3  + w4  + w5  + w6  = 0.45, which
is less than 1/2. Furthermore, only element x2  is greater than x7 , and w2  =
0.35, which is no greater than 1/2.
a.  Ar gue that the median of x1 , x2 , … , xn  is the weighted median of the xi
with weights wi  = 1/ n  for i  = 1, 2, … , n .
b.  Show how to compute the weighted median of n  elements in O ( n  lg n )
worst-case time using sorting.
c.  Show how to compute the weighted median in Θ( n ) worst-case time
using a linear -time median algorithm such as S ELECT  from Section 9.3 .
The post-of fice location problem  is defined as follows. The input is n
points p1 , p2 , … , pn  with associated weights w1 , w2 , … , wn . A solution is a
point p  (not necessarily one of the input points) that minimizes the sum 
, where d ( a , b ) is the distance between points a  and b .
d.  Ar gue that the weighted median is a best solution for the one-
dimensional post-of fice location problem, in which points are simply real
numbers and the distance between points a  and b  is d ( a , b ) = | a  – b |.
e.  Find the best solution for the two-dimensional post-of fice location
problem, in which the points are ( x , y ) coordinate pairs and the distance
between points a  = ( x1 , y1 ) and b  = ( x2 , y2 ) is the Manhattan distance
given by d ( a , b ) = | x1  – x2 | + | y1  – y2 |.
9-4     Small order statistics
Page number: 304
Let’ s denote by S ( n ) the worst-case number of comparisons used by S ELECT
to select the i th order statistic from n  numbers. Although S ( n ) = Θ( n ), the
constant hidden by the Θ-notation is rather lar ge. When i  is small relative to
n , there is an algorithm that uses S ELECT  as a subroutine but makes fewer
comparisons in the worst case.
a.  Describe an algorithm that uses Ui ( n ) comparisons to find the i th smallest
of n  elements, where
( Hint:  Begin with ⌊ n /2 ⌋  disjoint pairwise comparisons, and recurse on the
set containing the smaller element from each pair .)
b.  Show that, if i  < n /2, then Ui ( n ) = n  + O ( S (2 i ) lg( n / i )).
c.  Show that if i  is a constant less than n /2, then Ui ( n ) = n  + O (lg n ).
d.  Show that if i  = n / k  for k  ≥ 2, then Ui ( n ) = n  + O ( S (2 n / k ) lg k ).
9-5     Alternative analysis of randomized selection
In this problem, you will use indicator random variables to analyze the
procedure R ANDOMIZED -S ELECT  in a manner akin to our analysis of
R ANDOMIZED -Q UICKSOR T  in Section 7.4.2 .
As in the quicksort analysis, we assume that all elements are distinct,
and we rename the elements of the input array A  as z1 , z2 , … , zn , where zi  is
the i th smallest element. Thus the call R ANDOMIZED -S ELECT ( A , 1, n , i )
returns zi .
For 1 ≤ j  < k  ≤ n , let
X ijk = I { z j  is compared with z k  sometime during the execution of the algorithm to find z i }.
a.  Give an exact expression for E [ Xijk ]. ( Hint:  Y our expression may have
dif ferent values, depending on the values of i , j , and k .)
b.  Let Xi  denote the total number of comparisons between elements of array
A  when finding zi . Show that
Page number: 305
c.  Show that E [ Xi ] ≤ 4 n .
d.  Conclude that, assuming all elements of array A  are distinct,
R ANDOMIZED -S ELECT  runs in O ( n ) expected time.
9-6     Select with groups of 3
Exercise 9.3-1 asks you to show that the S ELECT  algorithm still runs in
linear time if the elements are divided into groups of 7. This problem asks
about dividing into groups of 3.
a.  Show that S ELECT  runs in linear time if you divide the elements into
groups whose size is any odd constant greater than 3.
b.  Show that S ELECT  runs in O ( n  lg n ) time if you divide the elements into
groups of size 3.
Because the bound in part (b) is just an upper bound, we do not know
whether the groups-of-3 strategy actually runs in O ( n ) time. But by
repeating the groups-of-3 idea on the middle group of medians, we can pick
a pivot that guarantees O ( n ) time. The S ELECT 3 algorithm on the next page
determines the i th smallest of an input array of n  > 1 distinct elements.
c.  Describe in English how the S ELECT 3 algorithm works. Include in your
description one or more suitable diagrams.
d.  Show that S ELECT 3 runs in O ( n ) time in the worst case.
Chapter notes
The worst-case linear -time median-finding algorithm was devised by Blum,
Floyd, Pratt, Rivest, and T arjan [ 62 ]. The fast randomized version is due to
Hoare [ 218 ]. Floyd and Rivest [ 147 ] have developed an improved
randomized version that partitions around an element recursively selected
from a small sample of the elements.
S ELECT 3( A , p , r , i )
Page number: 306
  1 while  ( r  – p  + 1) mod 9 ≠ 0
  2 for  j  = p  + 1 to  r //  put the minimum into A [ p ]
  3 if  A [ p ] > A [ j ]
  4 exchange A [ p ] with A [ j ]
  5 //  If we want the minimum of A [ p  : r ], we’re done.
  6 if  i  == 1
  7 r eturn  A [ p ]
  8 //  Otherwise, we want the ( i  – 1)st element of A [ p  + 1 : r ].
  9 p  = p  + 1
10 i  = i  – 1
1 1 g  = ( r  – p  + 1)/3 //  number of 3-element groups
12 for  j  = p  to  p  + g  – 1 //  run through the groups
13 sort 〈 A [ j ], A [ j  + g ], A [ j  + 2 g ]〉  in place
14 //  All group medians now lie in the middle third of A [ p  : r ].
15 g′  = g /3 //  number of 3-element subgroups
16 for  j  = p  + g  to  p  + g  + g′  – 1 //  sort the subgroups
17 sort 〈 A [ j ], A [ j  + g′ ], A [ j  + 2 g′ ]〉  in place
18 //  All subgroup medians now lie in the middle ninth of A [ p  : r ].
19 //  Find the pivot x  recursively as the median of the subgroup medians.
20 x  = S ELECT 3( A , p  + 4 g′ , p  + 5 g′  – 1, ⌈ g′ /2 ⌉ )
21 q  = P AR TITION -A ROUND ( A , p , r , x ) //  partition around the pivot
22 //  The rest is just like lines 19–24 of S ELECT .
23 k  = q  – p  + 1
24 if  i  == k
25 r eturn  A [ q ] //  the pivot value is the answer
26 elseif  i  < k
27 r eturn  S ELECT 3( A , p , q  – 1, i )
28 else r eturn  S ELECT 3( A , q  + 1, r , i  – k )
It is still unknown exactly how many comparisons are needed to
determine the median. Bent and John [ 48 ] gave a lower bound of 2 n
comparisons for median finding, and Schönhage, Paterson, and Pippenger
[ 397 ] gave an upper bound of 3 n . Dor and Zwick have improved on both of
these bounds. Their upper bound [ 123 ] is slightly less than 2.95 n , and their
lower bound [ 124 ] is (2 + ϵ ) n , for a small positive constant ϵ , thereby
improving slightly on related work by Dor et al. [ 122 ]. Paterson [ 354 ]
describes some of these results along with other related work.
Problem 9-6 was inspired by a paper by Chen and Dumitrescu [ 84 ].
1 As in the footnote on page 182, you can enforce the assumption that the numbers are distinct by
converting each input value A [ i ] to an ordered pair ( A [ i ], i ) with ( A [ i ], i ) < ( A [ j ], j ) if either A [ i ] < A [ j ]
or A [ i ] = A [ j ] and i  < j .
Page number: 307
2 W e could also use the Akra-Bazzi method from Section 4.7 , which involves calculus, to solve this
recurrence. Indeed, a similar recurrence (4.24) on page 1 17 was used to illustrate that method.
Page number: 308
Part III    Data Structures
Page number: 309
 
 
Intr oduction
Sets are as fundamental to computer science as they are to mathematics.
Whereas mathematical sets are unchanging, the sets manipulated by
algorithms can grow , shrink, or otherwise change over time. W e call such
sets dynamic . The next four chapters present some basic techniques for
representing finite dynamic sets and manipulating them on a computer .
Algorithms may require several types of operations to be performed on
sets. For example, many algorithms need only the ability to insert elements
into, delete elements from, and test membership in a set. W e call a dynamic
set that supports these operations a dictionary . Other algorithms require
more complicated operations. For example, min-priority queues, which
Chapter 6  introduced in the context of the heap data structure, support the
operations of inserting an element into and extracting the smallest element
from a set. The best way to implement a dynamic set depends upon the
operations that you need to support.
Elements of a dynamic set
In a typical implementation of a dynamic set, each element is represented
by an object whose attributes can be examined and manipulated given a
pointer to the object. Some kinds of dynamic sets assume that one of the
object’ s attributes is an identifying key . If the keys are all dif ferent, we can
think of the dynamic set as being a set of key values. The object may
contain satellite data , which are carried around in other object attributes but
are otherwise unused by the set implementation. It may also have attributes
that are manipulated by the set operations. These attributes may contain
data or pointers to other objects in the set.
Page number: 310
Some dynamic sets presuppose that the keys are drawn from a totally
ordered set, such as the real numbers, or the set of all words under the usual
alphabetic ordering. A total ordering allows us to define the minimum
element of the set, for example, or to speak of the next element lar ger than a
given element in a set.
Operations on dynamic sets
Operations on a dynamic set can be grouped into two categories: queries ,
which simply return information about the set, and modifying operations ,
which change the set. Here is a list of typical operations. Any specific
application will usually require only a few of these to be implemented.
S EARCH ( S , k )
A query that, given a set S  and a key value k , returns a pointer x  to an
element in S  such that x.key  = k , or NIL  if no such element belongs to S .
I NSER T ( S , x )
A modifying operation that adds the element pointed to by x  to the set S .
W e usually assume that any attributes in element x  needed by the set
implementation have already been initialized.
D ELETE ( S , x )
A modifying operation that, given a pointer x  to an element in the set S ,
removes x  from S . (Note that this operation takes a pointer to an element
x , not a key value.)
M INIMUM ( S ) and M AXIMUM ( S )
Queries on a totally ordered set S  that return a pointer to the element of S
with the smallest (for M INIMUM ) or lar gest (for M AXIMUM ) key .
S UCCESSOR ( S , x )
A query that, given an element x  whose key is from a totally ordered set
S , returns a pointer to the next lar ger element in S , or NIL  if x  is the
maximum element.
P REDECESSOR ( S , x )
A query that, given an element x  whose key is from a totally ordered set
S , returns a pointer to the next smaller element in S , or NIL  if x  is the
minimum element.
Page number: 311
In some situations, we can extend the queries S UCCESSOR  and P REDECESSOR
so that they apply to sets with nondistinct keys. For a set on n  keys, the
normal presumption is that a call to M INIMUM  followed by n  – 1 calls to
S UCCESSOR  enumerates the elements in the set in sorted order .
W e usually measure the time taken to execute a set operation in terms of
the size of the set. For example, Chapter 13  describes a data structure that
can support any of the operations listed above on a set of size n  in O (lg n )
time.
Of course, you can always choose to implement a dynamic set with an
array . The advantage of doing so is that the algorithms for the dynamic-set
operations are simple. The downside, however , is that many of these
operations have a worst-case running time of Θ( n ). If the array is not sorted,
I NSER T  and D ELETE  can take Θ(1) time, but the remaining operations take
Θ( n ) time. If instead the array is maintained in sorted order , then M INIMUM ,
M AXIMUM , S UCCESSOR , and P REDECESSOR  take Θ(1) time; S EARCH  takes
O (lg n ) time if implemented with binary search; but I NSER T  and D ELETE  take
Θ( n ) time in the worst case. The data structures studied in this part improve
on the array implementation for many of the dynamic-set operations.
Overview of Part III
Chapters 10 – 13  describe several data structures that we can use to
implement dynamic sets. W e’ll use many of these data structures later to
construct ef ficient algorithms for a variety of problems. W e already saw
another important data structure—the heap—in Chapter 6 .
Chapter 10  presents the essentials of working with simple data structures
such as arrays, matrices, stacks, queues, linked lists, and rooted trees. If you
have taken an introductory programming course, then much of this material
should be familiar to you.
Chapter 1 1  introduces hash tables, a widely used data structure
supporting the dictionary operations I NSER T , D ELETE , and S EARCH . In the
worst case, hash tables require Θ( n ) time to perform a S EARCH  operation,
but the expected time for hash-table operations is O (1). W e rely on
probability to analyze hash-table operations, but you can understand how
the operations work even without probability .
Binary search trees, which are covered in Chapter 12 , support all the
dynamic-set operations listed above. In the worst case, each operation takes
Page number: 312
Θ( n ) time on a tree with n  elements. Binary search trees serve as the basis
for many other data structures.
Chapter 13  introduces red-black trees, which are a variant of binary
search trees. Unlike ordinary binary search trees, red-black trees are
guaranteed to perform well: operations take O (lg n ) time in the worst case.
A red-black tree is a balanced search tree. Chapter 18  in Part V  presents
another kind of balanced search tree, called a B-tree. Although the
mechanics of red-black trees are somewhat intricate, you can glean most of
their properties from the chapter without studying the mechanics in detail.
Nevertheless, you probably will find walking through the code to be
instructive.
Page number: 313
10        Elementary Data Structur es
In this chapter , we examine the representation of dynamic sets by simple
data structures that use pointers. Although you can construct many complex
data structures using pointers, we present only the rudimentary ones: arrays,
matrices, stacks, queues, linked lists, and rooted trees.
10.1    Simple array-based data structur es: arrays, matrices, stacks,
queues
10.1.1    Arrays
W e assume that, as in most programming languages, an array is stored as a
contiguous sequence of bytes in memory . If the first element of an array has
index s  (for example, in an array with 1-origin indexing, s  = 1), the array
starts at memory address a , and each array element occupies b  bytes, then
the i th element occupies bytes a  + b ( i  – s ) through a  + b ( i  – s  + 1) – 1. Since
most of the arrays in this book are indexed starting at 1, and a few starting
at 0, we can simplify these formulas a little. When s  = 1, the i th element
occupies bytes a  + b ( i  – 1) through a  + bi  – 1, and when s  = 0, the i th
element occupies bytes a  + bi  through a  + b ( i  + 1) – 1. Assuming that the
computer can access all memory locations in the same amount of time (as in
the RAM model described in Section 2.2 ), it takes constant time to access
any array element, regardless of the index.
Most programming languages require each element of a particular array
to be the same size. If the elements of a given array might occupy dif ferent
numbers of bytes, then the above formulas fail to apply , since the element
size b  is not a constant. In such cases, the array elements are usually objects
Page number: 314
of varying sizes, and what actually appears in each array element is a
pointer to the object. The number of bytes occupied by a pointer is typically
the same, no matter what the pointer references, so that to access an object
in an array , the above formulas give the address of the pointer to the object
and then the pointer must be followed to access the object itself.
Figur e 10.1  Four ways to store the 2 × 3 matrix M  from equation (10.1). (a)  In row-major order , in a
single array . (b)  In column-major order , in a single array . (c)  In row-major order , with one array per
row (tan) and a single array (blue) of pointers to the row arrays. (d)  In column-major order , with one
array per column (tan) and a single array (blue) of pointers to the column arrays.
10.1.2    Matrices
W e typically represent a matrix or two-dimensional array by one or more
one-dimensional arrays. The two most common ways to store a matrix are
row-major and column-major order . Let’ s consider an m  × n  matrix—a
matrix with m  rows and n  columns. In row-major order , the matrix is stored
row by row , and in column-major order , the matrix is stored column by
column. For example, consider the 2 × 3 matrix
Row-major order stores the two rows 1 2 3 and 4 5 6, whereas column-
major order stores the three columns 1 4; 2 5; and 3 6.
Parts (a) and (b) of Figure 10.1  show how to store this matrix using a
single one-dimensional array . It’ s stored in row-major order in part (a) and
in column-major order in part (b). If the rows, columns, and the single array
all are indexed starting at s , then M  [ i , j ]—the element in row i  and column j
—is at array index s  + ( n ( i  – s )) + ( j  – s ) with row-major order and s  + ( m ( j
– s )) + ( i  – s ) with column-major order . When s  = 1, the single-array indices
are n ( i  – 1) + j  with row-major order and i  + m ( j  – 1) with column-major
order . When s  = 0, the single-array indices are simpler: ni  + j  with row-
major order and i  + mj  with column-major order . For the example matrix M
Page number: 315
with 1-origin indexing, element M  [2, 1] is stored at index 3(2 – 1) + 1 = 4
in the single array using row-major order and at index 2 + 2(1 – 1) = 2
using column-major order .
Parts (c) and (d) of Figure 10.1  show multiple-array strategies for
storing the example matrix. In part (c), each row is stored in its own array
of length n , shown in tan. Another array , with m  elements, shown in blue,
points to the m  row arrays. If we call the blue array A , then A [ i ] points to the
array storing the entries for row i  of M , and array element A [ i ] [ j ] stores
matrix element M  [ i , j ]. Part (d) shows the column-major version of the
multiple-array representation, with n  arrays, each of length m , representing
the n  columns. Matrix element M  [ i , j ] is stored in array element A [ j ] [ i ].
Single-array representations are typically more ef ficient on modern
machines than multiple-array representations. But multiple-array
representations can sometimes be more flexible, for example, allowing for
“ragged arrays,” in which the rows in the row-major version may have
dif ferent lengths, or symmetrically for the column-major version, where
columns may have dif ferent lengths.
Occasionally , other schemes are used to store matrices. In the block
representation , the matrix is divided into blocks, and each block is stored
contiguously . For example, a 4 × 4 matrix that is divided into 2 × 2 blocks,
such as
might be stored in a single array in the order 〈 1, 2, 5, 6, 3, 4, 7, 8, 9, 10, 13,
14, 1 1, 12, 15, 16 〉 .
10.1.3    Stacks and queues
Stacks and queues are dynamic sets in which the element removed from the
set by the D ELETE  operation is prespecified. In a stack , the element deleted
from the set is the one most recently inserted: the stack implements a last-
in , first-out , or LIFO , policy . Similarly , in a queue , the element deleted is
always the one that has been in the set for the longest time: the queue
implements a first-in, first-out , or FIFO , policy . There are several ef ficient
Page number: 316
ways to implement stacks and queues on a computer . Here, you will see
how to use an array with attributes to store them.
Stacks
The I NSER T  operation on a stack is often called P USH , and the D ELETE
operation, which does not take an element ar gument, is often called P OP .
These names are allusions to physical stacks, such as the spring-loaded
stacks of plates used in cafeterias. The order in which plates are popped
from the stack is the reverse of the order in which they were pushed onto
the stack, since only the top plate is accessible.
Figure 10.2  shows how to implement a stack of at most n  elements with
an array S [1 : n ]. The stack has attributes S.top , indexing the most recently
inserted element, and S.size , equaling the size n  of the array . The stack
consists of elements S [1 : S.top ], where S [1] is the element at the bottom of
the stack and S [ S.top ] is the element at the top.
Figur e 10.2  An array implementation of a stack S . Stack elements appear only in the tan positions.
(a)  Stack S  has 4 elements. The top element is 9. (b)  Stack S  after the calls P USH ( S , 17) and
P USH ( S , 3). (c)  Stack S  after the call P OP ( S ) has returned the element 3, which is the one most
recently pushed. Although element 3 still appears in the array , it is no longer in the stack. The top is
element 17.
When S.top  = 0, the stack contains no elements and is empty . W e can
test whether the stack is empty with the query operation S T ACK -E MPTY .
Upon an attempt to pop an empty stack, the stack underflows , which is
normally an error . If S.top  exceeds S.size , the stack overflows .
The procedures S T ACK -E MPTY , P USH , and P OP  implement each of the
stack operations with just a few lines of code. Figure 10.2  shows the ef fects
of the modifying operations P USH  and P OP . Each of the three stack
operations takes O (1) time.
S T ACK -E MPTY ( S )
Page number: 317
1 if  S.top  == 0
2 r eturn  T RUE
3 else r eturn  F ALSE
P USH ( S , x )
1 if  S.top  == S.size
2 err or  “overflow”
3 else  S.top  = S.top  + 1
4 S [ S.top ] = x
P OP ( S )
1 if  S T ACK -E MPTY ( S )
2 err or  “underflow”
3 else  S.top  = S.top  – 1
4 r eturn  S [ S.top  + 1]
Figur e 10.3  A queue implemented using an array Q [1 : 12]. Queue elements appear only in the tan
positions. (a)  The queue has 5 elements, in locations Q [7 : 1 1]. (b)  The configuration of the queue
after the calls E NQUEUE ( Q , 17), E NQUEUE ( Q , 3), and E NQUEUE ( Q , 5). (c)  The configuration of
the queue after the call D EQUEUE ( Q ) returns the key value 15 formerly at the head of the queue.
The new head has key 6.
Queues
Page number: 318
W e call the I NSER T  operation on a queue E NQUEUE , and we call the D ELETE
operation D EQUEUE . Like the stack operation P OP , D EQUEUE  takes no
element ar gument. The FIFO property of a queue causes it to operate like a
line of customers waiting for service. The queue has a head  and a tail .
When an element is enqueued, it takes its place at the tail of the queue, just
as a newly arriving customer takes a place at the end of the line. The
element dequeued is always the one at the head of the queue, like the
customer at the head of the line, who has waited the longest.
Figure 10.3  shows one way to implement a queue of at most n  – 1
elements using an array Q [1 : n ], with the attribute Q.size  equaling the size
n  of the array . The queue has an attribute Q.head  that indexes, or points to,
its head. The attribute Q.tail  indexes the next location at which a newly
arriving element will be inserted into the queue. The elements in the queue
reside in locations Q.head , Q.head  + 1, … , Q.tail  – 1, where we “wrap
around” in the sense that location 1 immediately follows location n  in a
circular order . When Q.head  = Q.tail , the queue is empty . Initially , we have
Q.head  = Q.tail  = 1. An attempt to dequeue an element from an empty
queue causes the queue to underflow . When Q.head  = Q.tail  + 1 or both
Q.head  = 1 and Q.tail  = Q.size , the queue is full, and an attempt to enqueue
an element causes the queue to overflow .
In the procedures E NQUEUE  and D EQUEUE , we have omitted the error
checking for underflow and overflow . (Exercise 10.1-5 asks you to supply
these checks.) Figure 10.3  shows the ef fects of the E NQUEUE  and D EQUEUE
operations. Each operation takes O (1) time.
E NQUEUE ( Q , x )
1 Q [ Q.tail ] = x
2 if  Q.tail  == Q.size
3 Q.tail  = 1
4 else  Q.tail  = Q.tail  + 1
D EQUEUE ( Q )
1 x  = Q [ Q.head ]
2 if  Q.head  == Q.size
3 Q.head  = 1
4 else  Q.head  = Q.head  + 1
5 r eturn  x
Page number: 319
Exer cises
10.1-1
Consider an m  × n  matrix in row-major order , where both m  and n  are
powers of 2 and rows and columns are indexed from 0. W e can represent a
row index i  in binary by the lg m  bits 〈 ilg m  – 1 , ilg m  – 2 , … , i0〉  and a column
index j  in binary by the lg n  bits 〈 jlg n  – 1 , jlg n  – 2 , … , j0〉 . Suppose that this
matrix is a 2 × 2 block matrix, where each block has m /2 rows and n /2
columns, and it is to be represented by a single array with 0-origin indexing.
Show how to construct the binary representation of the (lg m  + lg n )-bit
index into the single array from the binary representations of i  and j .
10.1-2
Using Figure 10.2  as a model, illustrate the result of each operation in the
sequence P USH ( S , 4), P USH ( S , 1), P USH ( S , 3), P OP ( S ), P USH ( S , 8), and P OP ( S )
on an initially empty stack S  stored in array S [1 : 6]
10.1-3
Explain how to implement two stacks in one array A [1 : n ] in such a way
that neither stack overflows unless the total number of elements in both
stacks together is n . The P USH  and P OP  operations should run in O (1) time.
10.1-4
Using Figure 10.3  as a model, illustrate the result of each operation in the
sequence E NQUEUE ( Q , 4), E NQUEUE ( Q , 1), E NQUEUE ( Q , 3), D EQUEUE ( Q ),
E NQUEUE ( Q , 8), and D EQUEUE ( Q ) on an initially empty queue Q  stored in
array Q [1 : 6].
10.1-5
Rewrite E NQUEUE  and D EQUEUE  to detect underflow and overflow of a
queue.
10.1-6
Whereas a stack allows insertion and deletion of elements at only one end,
and a queue allows insertion at one end and deletion at the other end, a
deque  (double-ended queue, pronounced like “deck”) allows insertion and
deletion at both ends. W rite four O (1)-time procedures to insert elements
into and delete elements from both ends of a deque implemented by an
array .
Page number: 320
10.1-7
Show how to implement a queue using two stacks. Analyze the running
time of the queue operations.
10.1-8
Show how to implement a stack using two queues. Analyze the running
time of the stack operations.
10.2    Linked lists
A linked list  is a data structure in which the objects are arranged in a linear
order . Unlike an array , however , in which the linear order is determined by
the array indices, the order in a linked list is determined by a pointer in each
object. Since the elements of linked lists often contain keys that can be
searched for , linked lists are sometimes called search lists . Linked lists
provide a simple, flexible representation for dynamic sets, supporting
(though not necessarily ef ficiently) all the operations listed on page 250.
As shown in Figure 10.4 , each element of a doubly linked list  L  is an
object with an attribute key  and two pointer attributes: next  and pr ev . The
object may also contain other satellite data. Given an element x  in the list,
x.next  points to its successor in the linked list, and x.pr ev  points to its
predecessor . If x.pr ev  = NIL , the element x  has no predecessor and is
therefore the first element, or head , of the list. If x.next  = NIL , the element x
has no successor and is therefore the last element, or tail , of the list. An
attribute L.head  points to the first element of the list. If L.head  = NIL , the list
is empty .
Page number: 321
Figur e 10.4 (a)  A doubly linked list L  representing the dynamic set {1, 4, 9, 16}. Each element in the
list is an object with attributes for the key and pointers (shown by arrows) to the next and previous
objects. The next  attribute of the tail and the pr ev  attribute of the head are NIL , indicated by a
diagonal slash. The attribute L.head  points to the head. (b)  Following the execution of L IST -
P REPEND ( L , x ), where x.key  = 25, the linked list has an object with key 25 as the new head. This
new object points to the old head with key 9. (c)  The result of calling L IST -I NSER T ( x , y ), where
x.key  = 36 and y  points to the object with key 9. (d)  The result of the subsequent call L IST -
D ELETE ( L , x ), where x  points to the object with key 4.
A list may have one of several forms. It may be either singly linked or
doubly linked, it may be sorted or not, and it may be circular or not. If a list
is singly linked , each element has a next  pointer but not a pr ev  pointer . If a
list is sorted , the linear order of the list corresponds to the linear order of
keys stored in elements of the list. The minimum element is then the head
of the list, and the maximum element is the tail. If the list is unsorted , the
elements can appear in any order . In a circular list , the pr ev  pointer of the
head of the list points to the tail, and the next  pointer of the tail of the list
points to the head. Y ou can think of a circular list as a ring of elements. In
the remainder of this section, we assume that the lists we are working with
are unsorted and doubly linked.
Sear ching a linked list
The procedure L IST -S EARCH ( L , k ) finds the first element with key k  in list L
by a simple linear search, returning a pointer to this element. If no object
with key k  appears in the list, then the procedure returns N IL . For the linked
list in Figure 10.4(a) , the call L IST -S EARCH ( L , 4) returns a pointer to the
third element, and the call L IST -S EARCH ( L , 7) returns NIL . T o search a list of
Page number: 322
n  objects, the L IST -S EARCH  procedure takes Θ( n ) time in the worst case,
since it may have to search the entire list.
L IST -S EARCH ( L , k )
1 x  = L.head
2 while  x  ≠ NIL  and x.key  ≠ k
3 x  = x.next
4 r eturn  x
Inserting into a linked list
Given an element x  whose key  attribute has already been set, the L IST -
P REPEND  procedure adds x  to the front of the linked list, as shown in Figure
10.4(b) . (Recall that our attribute notation can cascade, so that L.head.pr ev
denotes the pr ev  attribute of the object that L.head  points to.) The running
time for L IST -P REPEND  on a list of n  elements is O (1).
L IST -P REPEND ( L , x )
1 x.next  = L.head
2 x.pr ev  = NIL
3 if  L.head  ≠ NIL
4 L.head.pr ev  = x
5 L.head  = x
Y ou can insert anywhere within a linked list. As Figure 10.4(c)  shows, if
you have a pointer y  to an object in the list, the L IST -I NSER T  procedure on
the facing page “splices” a new element x  into the list, immediately
following y , in O (1) time. Since L IST -I NSER T  never references the list object
L , it is not supplied as a parameter .
L IST -I NSER T ( x , y )
1 x.next  = y .next
2 x.pr ev  = y
3 if  y .next  ≠ NIL
4 y .next.pr ev  = x
5 y .next  = x
Deleting fr om a linked list
Page number: 323
The procedure L IST -D ELETE  removes an element x  from a linked list L . It
must be given a pointer to x , and it then “‘splices” x  out of the list by
updating pointers. T o delete an element with a given key , first call L IST -
S EARCH  to retrieve a pointer to the element. Figure 10.4(d)  shows how an
element is deleted from a linked list. L IST -D ELETE  runs in O (1) time, but to
delete an element with a given key , the call to L IST -S EARCH  makes the
worst-case running time be Θ( n ).
L IST -D ELETE ( L , x )
1 if  x.pr ev  ≠ NIL
2 x.pr ev .next  = x.next
3 else  L.head  = x.next
4 if  x.next  ≠ NIL
5 x.next.pr ev  = x.pr ev
Insertion and deletion are faster operations on doubly linked lists than on
arrays. If you want to insert a new first element into an array or delete the
first element in an array , maintaining the relative order of all the existing
elements, then each of the existing elements needs to be moved by one
position. In the worst case, therefore, insertion and deletion take Θ( n ) time
in an array , compared with O (1) time for a doubly linked list. (Exercise
10.2-1 asks you to show that deleting an element from a singly linked list
takes Θ( n ) time in the worst case.) If, however , you want to find the k th
element in the linear order , it takes just O (1) time in an array regardless of
k , but in a linked list, you’d have to traverse k  elements, taking Θ( k ) time.
Sentinels
The code for L IST -D ELETE  is simpler if you ignore the boundary conditions
at the head and tail of the list:
Page number: 324
Figur e 10.5  A circular , doubly linked list with a sentinel. The sentinel L.nil , in blue, appears between
the head and tail. The attribute L.head  is no longer needed, since the head of the list is L.nil.next . (a)
An empty list. (b)  The linked list from Figure 10.4(a) , with key 9 at the head and key 1 at the tail. (c)
The list after executing L IST -I NSER T ′ ( x , L.nil ), where x.key  = 25. The new object becomes the head
of the list. (d)  The list after deleting the object with key 1. The new tail is the object with key 4. (e)
The list after executing L IST -I NSER T ′ ( x , y ), where x.key  = 36 and y  points to the object with key 9.
L IST -D ELETE ′ ( x )
1 x.pr ev .next  = x.next
2 x.next.pr ev  = x.pr ev
A sentinel  is a dummy object that allows us to simplify boundary
conditions. In a linked list L , the sentinel is an object L.nil  that represents
NIL  but has all the attributes of the other objects in the list. References to NIL
are replaced by references to the sentinel L.nil . As shown in Figure 10.5 ,
this change turns a regular doubly linked list into a circular , doubly linked
list with a sentinel , in which the sentinel L.nil  lies between the head and
tail. The attribute L.nil.next  points to the head of the list, and L.nil.pr ev
points to the tail. Similarly , both the next  attribute of the tail and the pr ev
attribute of the head point to L.nil . Since L.nil.next  points to the head, the
attribute L.head  is eliminated altogether , with references to it replaced by
references to L.nil.next . Figure 10.5(a)  shows that an empty list consists of
just the sentinel, and both L.nil.next  and L.nil.pr ev  point to L.nil .
Page number: 325
T o delete an element from the list, just use the two-line procedure L IST -
D ELETE ′ from before. Just as L IST -I NSER T  never references the list object L ,
neither does L IST -D ELETE ′. Y ou should never delete the sentinel L.nil  unless
you are deleting the entire list!
The L IST -I NSER T ′ procedure inserts an element x  into the list following
object y . No separate procedure for prepending is necessary: to insert at the
head of the list, let y  be L.nil ; and to insert at the tail, let y  be L.nil.pr ev .
Figure 10.5  shows the ef fects of L IST -I NSER T ′ and L IST -D ELETE ′ on a sample
list.
L IST -I NSER T ′ ( x , y )
1 x.next  = y .next
2 x.pr ev  = y
3 y .next.pr ev  = x
4 y .next  = x
Searching a circular , doubly linked list with a sentinel has the same
asymptotic running time as without a sentinel, but it is possible to decrease
the constant factor . The test in line 2 of L IST -S EARCH  makes two
comparisons: one to check whether the search has run of f the end of the list
and, if not, one to check whether the key resides in the current element x .
Suppose that you know  that the key is somewhere in the list. Then you do
not need to check whether the search runs of f the end of the list, thereby
eliminating one comparison in each iteration of the while  loop.
The sentinel provides a place to put the key before starting the search.
The search starts at the head L.nil.next  of list L , and it stops if it finds the
key somewhere in the list. Now the search is guaranteed to find the key ,
either in the sentinel or before reaching the sentinel. If the key is found
before reaching the sentinel, then it really is in the element where the search
stops. If, however , the search goes through all the elements in the list and
finds the key only in the sentinel, then the key is not really in the list, and
the search returns NIL . The procedure L IST -S EARCH ′ embodies this idea. (If
your sentinel requires its key  attribute to be NIL , then you might want to
assign L.nil.key  = NIL  before line 5.)
L IST -S EARCH ′ ( L , k )
1 L.nil.key  = k //  store the key in the sentinel to guarantee it is in list
2 x  = L.nil.next //  start at the head of the list
Page number: 326
3 while  x.key  ≠ k
4 x  = x.next
5 if  x  == L.nil //  found k  in the sentinel
6 r eturn  NIL //  k  was not really in the list
7 else r eturn  x //  found k  in element x
Sentinels often simplify code and, as in searching a linked list, they
might speed up code by a small constant factor , but they don’ t typically
improve the asymptotic running time. Use them judiciously . When there are
many small lists, the extra storage used by their sentinels can represent
significant wasted memory . In this book, we use sentinels only when they
significantly simplify the code.
Exer cises
10.2-1
Explain why the dynamic-set operation I NSER T  on a singly linked list can be
implemented in O (1) time, but the worst-case time for D ELETE  is Θ( n ).
10.2-2
Implement a stack using a singly linked list. The operations P USH  and P OP
should still take O (1) time. Do you need to add any attributes to the list?
10.2-3
Implement a queue using a singly linked list. The operations E NQUEUE  and
D EQUEUE  should still take O (1) time. Do you need to add any attributes to
the list?
10.2-4
The dynamic-set operation U NION  takes two disjoint sets S1  and S2  as input,
and it returns a set S  = S1  ⋃  S2  consisting of all the elements of S1  and S2 .
The sets S1  and S2  are usually destroyed by the operation. Show how to
support U NION  in O (1) time using a suitable list data structure.
10.2-5
Give a Θ( n )-time nonrecursive procedure that reverses a singly linked list of
n  elements. The procedure should use no more than constant storage
beyond that needed for the list itself.
★  10.2-6
Page number: 327
Explain how to implement doubly linked lists using only one pointer value
x.np  per item instead of the usual two ( next  and pr ev ). Assume that all
pointer values can be interpreted as k -bit integers, and define x.np  = x.next
XOR x.pr ev , the k -bit “exclusive-or” of x.next  and x.pr ev . The value NIL  is
represented by 0. Be sure to describe what information you need to access
the head of the list. Show how to implement the S EARCH , I NSER T , and
D ELETE  operations on such a list. Also show how to reverse such a list in
O (1) time.
10.3    Repr esenting r ooted tr ees
Linked lists work well for representing linear relationships, but not all
relationships are linear . In this section, we look specifically at the problem
of representing rooted trees by linked data structures. W e first look at binary
trees, and then we present a method for rooted trees in which nodes can
have an arbitrary number of children.
W e represent each node of a tree by an object. As with linked lists, we
assume that each node contains a key  attribute. The remaining attributes of
interest are pointers to other nodes, and they vary according to the type of
tree.
Binary tr ees
Figure 10.6  shows how to use the attributes p , left , and right  to store
pointers to the parent, left child, and right child of each node in a binary tree
T . If x.p  = NIL , then x  is the root. If node x  has no left child, then x.left  = NIL ,
and similarly for the right child. The root of the entire tree T  is pointed to by
the attribute T .r oot . If T .r oot  = NIL , then the tree is empty .
Rooted tr ees with unbounded branching
It’ s simple to extend the scheme for representing a binary tree to any class
of trees in which the number of children of each node is at most some
constant k : replace the left  and right  attributes by child1 , child2 , … , childk .
This scheme no longer works when the number of children of a node is
unbounded, however , since we do not know how many attributes to allocate
in advance. Moreover , if k , the number of children, is bounded by a lar ge
Page number: 328
constant but most nodes have a small number of children, we may waste a
lot of memory .
Fortunately , there is a clever scheme to represent trees with arbitrary
numbers of children. It has the advantage of using only O ( n ) space for any
n -node rooted tree. The left-child, right-sibling representation  appears in
Figure 10.7 . As before, each node contains a parent pointer p , and T .r oot
points to the root of tree T . Instead of having a pointer to each of its
children, however , each node x  has only two pointers:
1 . x.left-child  points to the leftmost child of node x , and
2 . x.right-sibling  points to the sibling of x  immediately to its right.
If node x  has no children, then x.left-child  = NIL , and if node x  is the
rightmost child of its parent, then x.right-sibling  = NIL .
Figur e 10.6  The representation of a binary tree T . Each node x  has the attributes x.p  (top), x.left
(lower left), and x.right  (lower right). The key  attributes are not shown.
Page number: 329
Figur e 10.7  The left-child, right-sibling representation of a tree T . Each node x  has attributes x.p
(top), x.left-child  (lower left), and x.right-sibling  (lower right). The key  attributes are not shown.
Other tr ee r epr esentations
W e sometimes represent rooted trees in other ways. In Chapter 6 , for
example, we represented a heap, which is based on a complete binary tree,
by a single array along with an attribute giving the index of the last node in
the heap. The trees that appear in Chapter 19  are traversed only toward the
root, and so only the parent pointers are present: there are no pointers to
children. Many other schemes are possible. Which scheme is best depends
on the application.
Exer cises
10.3-1
Draw the binary tree rooted at index 6 that is represented by the following
attributes:
index key left right
1 17 8 9
2 14 NIL NIL
3 12 NIL NIL
Page number: 330
4 20 10 NIL
5 33 2 NIL
6 15 1 4
7 28 NIL NIL
8 22 NIL NIL
9 13 3 7
10 25 NIL 5
10.3-2
W rite an O ( n )-time recursive procedure that, given an n -node binary tree,
prints out the key of each node in the tree.
10.3-3
W rite an O ( n )-time nonrecursive procedure that, given an n -node binary
tree, prints out the key of each node in the tree. Use a stack as an auxiliary
data structure.
10.3-4
W rite an O ( n )-time procedure that prints out all the keys of an arbitrary
rooted tree with n  nodes, where the tree is stored using the left-child, right-
sibling representation.
★  10.3-5
W rite an O ( n )-time nonrecursive procedure that, given an n -node binary
tree, prints out the key of each node. Use no more than constant extra space
outside of the tree itself and do not modify the tree, even temporarily ,
during the procedure.
★  10.3-6
The left-child, right-sibling representation of an arbitrary rooted tree uses
three pointers in each node: left-child , right-sibling , and par ent . From any
node, its parent can be accessed in constant time and all its children can be
accessed in time linear in the number of children. Show how to use only
two pointers and one boolean value in each node x  so that x ’ s parent or all
of x ’ s children can be accessed in time linear in the number of x ’ s children.
Pr oblems
10-1     Comparisons among lists
Page number: 331
For each of the four types of lists in the following table, what is the
asymptotic worst-case running time for each dynamic-set operation listed?
 unsorted, singly
linkedsorted, singly
linkedunsorted, doubly
linkedsorted, doubly
linked
S EARCH
I NSER T
D ELETE
S UCCESSOR
P REDECESSOR
M INIMUM
M AXIMUM
10-2     Mergeable heaps using linked lists
A mergeable heap  supports the following operations: M AKE -H EAP  (which
creates an empty mer geable heap), I NSER T , M INIMUM , E XTRACT -M IN , and
U NION .1 Show how to implement mer geable heaps using linked lists in each
of the following cases. T ry to make each operation as ef ficient as possible.
Analyze the running time of each operation in terms of the size of the
dynamic set(s) being operated on.
a.  Lists are sorted.
b.  Lists are unsorted.
c.  Lists are unsorted, and dynamic sets to be mer ged are disjoint.
10-3     Searching a sorted compact list
W e can represent a singly linked list with two arrays, key  and next . Given
the index i  of an element, its value is stored in key [ i ], and the index of its
successor is given by next [ i ], where next [ i ] = NIL  for the last element. W e
also need the index head  of the first element in the list. An n -element list
stored in this way is compact  if it is stored only in positions 1 through n  of
the key  and next  arrays.
Let’ s assume that all keys are distinct and that the compact list is also
sorted, that is, key [ i ] < key [ next [ i ]] for all i  = 1, 2, … , n  such that next [ i ] ≠
NIL . Under these assumptions, you will show that the randomized algorithm
C OMP ACT -L IST -S EARCH  searches the list for key k  in 
  expected time.
Page number: 332
C OMP ACT -L IST -S EARCH ( key , next , head , n , k )
  1 i  = head
  2 while  i  ≠ NIL  and key [ i ] < k
  3 j  = R ANDOM (1, n )
  4 if  key [ i ] < key [ j ] and key [ j ] ≤ k
  5 i  = j
  6 if  key [ i ] == k
  7 r eturn  i
  8 i  = next [ i ]
  9 if  i  == NIL  or key [ i ] > k
10 r eturn  NIL
1 1 else r eturn  i
If you ignore lines 3–7 of the procedure, you can see that it’ s an ordinary
algorithm for searching a sorted linked list, in which index i  points to each
position of the list in turn. The search terminates once the index i  “falls of f”
the end of the list or once key [ i ] ≥ k . In the latter case, if key [ i ] = k , the
procedure has found a key with the value k . If, however , key [ i ] > k , then the
search will never find a key with the value k , so that terminating the search
was the correct action.
Lines 3–7 attempt to skip ahead to a randomly chosen position j . Such a
skip helps if key [ j ] is lar ger than key [ i ] and no lar ger than k . In such a case, j
marks a position in the list that i  would reach during an ordinary list search.
Because the list is compact, we know that any choice of j  between 1 and n
indexes some element in the list.
Instead of analyzing the performance of C OMP ACT -L IST -S EARCH  directly ,
you will analyze a related algorithm, C OMP ACT -L IST -S EARCH , which
executes two separate loops. This algorithm takes an additional parameter t ,
which specifies an upper bound on the number of iterations of the first loop.
C OMP ACT -L IST -S EARCH ′ ( key , next , head , n , k , t )
  1 i  = head
  2 for  q  = 1 to  t
  3 j  = R ANDOM (1, n )
  4 if  key [ i ] < key [ j ] and key [ j ] ≤ k
  5 i  = j
  6 if  key [ i ] == k
  7 r eturn  i
  8 while  i  ≠ NIL  and key [ i ] < k
  9 i  = next [ i ]
10 if  i  == NIL  or key [ i ] > k
1 1 r eturn  NIL
Page number: 333
12 else r eturn  i
T o compare the execution of the two algorithms, assume that the
sequence of calls of R ANDOM (1, n ) yields the same sequence of integers for
both algorithms.
a.  Ar gue that for any value of t , C OMP ACT -L IST -S EARCH ( key , next , head , n ,
k ) and C OMP ACT -L IST -S EARCH ′ ( key , next , head , n , k , t ) return the same
result and that the number of iterations of the while  loop of lines 2–8 in
C OMP ACT -L IST -S EARCH  is at most the total number of iterations of both
the for  and while  loops in C OMP ACT -L IST -S EARCH ′.
In the call C OMP ACT -L IST -S EARCH ′ ( key , next , head , n , k , t ), let Xt  be the
random variable that describes the distance in the linked list (that is,
through the chain of next  pointers) from position i  to the desired key k  after
t  iterations of the for  loop of lines 2–7 have occurred.
b.  Ar gue that C OMP ACT -L IST -S EARCH ′ ( key , next , head , n , k , t ) has an
expected running time of O ( t  + E [ Xt ]).
c.  Show that 
 . ( Hint:  Use equation (C.28) on page
1 193.)
d.  Show that 
 . ( Hint:  Use inequality (A.18) on page
1 150.)
e.  Prove that E [ Xt ] ≤ n /( t  + 1).
f.  Show that C OMP ACT -L IST -S EARCH ′ ( key , next , head , n , k , t ) has an
expected running time of O ( t  + n / t ).
g.  Conclude that C OMP ACT -L IST -S EARCH  runs in 
  expected time.
h.  Why do we assume that all keys are distinct in C OMP ACT -L IST -S EARCH ?
Ar gue that random skips do not necessarily help asymptotically when the
list contains repeated key values.
Chapter notes
Aho, Hopcroft, and Ullman [ 6 ] and Knuth [ 259 ] are excellent references for
elementary data structures. Many other texts cover both basic data
Page number: 334
structures and their implementation in a particular programming language.
Examples of these types of textbooks include Goodrich and T amassia [ 196 ],
Main [ 31 1 ], Shaf fer [ 406 ], and W eiss [ 452 , 453 , 454 ]. The book by Gonnet
and Baeza-Y ates [ 193 ] provides experimental data on the performance of
many data-structure operations.
The origin of stacks and queues as data structures in computer science is
unclear , since corresponding notions already existed in mathematics and
paper -based business practices before the introduction of digital computers.
Knuth [ 259 ] cites A. M. T uring for the development of stacks for subroutine
linkage in 1947.
Pointer -based data structures also seem to be a folk invention.
According to Knuth, pointers were apparently used in early computers with
drum memories. The A-1 language developed by G. M. Hopper in 1951
represented algebraic formulas as binary trees. Knuth credits the IPL-II
language, developed in 1956 by A. Newell, J. C. Shaw , and H. A. Simon,
for recognizing the importance and promoting the use of pointers. Their
IPL-III language, developed in 1957, included explicit stack operations.
1 Because we have defined a mer geable heap to support M INIMUM  and E XTRACT -M IN , we can
also refer to it as a mergeable min-heap . Alternatively , if it supports M AXIMUM  and E XTRACT -
M AX , it is a mergeable max-heap .
Page number: 335
1 1        Hash T ables
Many applications require a dynamic set that supports only the dictionary
operations I NSER T , S EARCH , and D ELETE . For example, a compiler that
translates a programming language maintains a symbol table, in which the
keys of elements are arbitrary character strings corresponding to identifiers
in the language. A hash table is an ef fective data structure for implementing
dictionaries. Although searching for an element in a hash table can take as
long as searching for an element in a linked list—Θ( n ) time in the worst
case—in practice, hashing performs extremely well. Under reasonable
assumptions, the average time to search for an element in a hash table is
O (1). Indeed, the built-in dictionaries of Python are implemented with hash
tables.
A hash table generalizes the simpler notion of an ordinary array . Directly
addressing into an ordinary array takes advantage of the O (1) access time
for any array element. Section 1 1.1  discusses direct addressing in more
detail. T o use direct addressing, you must be able to allocate an array that
contains a position for every possible key .
When the number of keys actually stored is small relative to the total
number of possible keys, hash tables become an ef fective alternative to
directly addressing an array , since a hash table typically uses an array of
size proportional to the number of keys actually stored. Instead of using the
key as an array index directly , we compute  the array index from the key .
Section 1 1.2  presents the main ideas, focusing on “chaining” as a way to
handle “collisions,” in which more than one key maps to the same array
index. Section 1 1.3  describes how to compute array indices from keys using
hash functions. W e present and analyze several variations on the basic
theme. Section 1 1.4  looks at “open addressing,” which is another way to
Page number: 336
deal with collisions. The bottom line is that hashing is an extremely
ef fective and practical technique: the basic dictionary operations require
only O (1) time on the average. Section 1 1.5  discusses the hierarchical
memory systems of modern computer systems have and illustrates how to
design hash tables that work well in such systems.
1 1.1    Dir ect-addr ess tables
Direct addressing is a simple technique that works well when the universe
U  of keys is reasonably small. Suppose that an application needs a dynamic
set in which each element has a distinct key drawn from the universe U  =
{0, 1, …, m  − 1}, where m  is not too lar ge.
T o represent the dynamic set, you can use an array , or direct-address
table , denoted by T [0 : m  − 1], in which each position, or slot , corresponds
to a key in the universe U . Figure 1 1.1  illustrates this approach. Slot k
points to an element in the set with key k . If the set contains no element
with key k , then T [ k ] = NIL .
The dictionary operations D IRECT -A DDRESS -S EARCH , D IRECT -A DDRESS -
I NSER T , and D IRECT -A DDRESS -D ELETE  on the following page are trivial to
implement. Each takes only O (1) time.
For some applications, the direct-address table itself can hold the
elements in the dynamic set. That is, rather than storing an element’ s key
and satellite data in an object external to the direct-address table, with a
pointer from a slot in the table to the object, save space by storing the object
directly in the slot. T o indicate an empty slot, use a special key . Then again,
why store the key of the object at all? The index of the object is  its key! Of
course, then you’d need some way to tell whether slots are empty .
Page number: 337
Figur e 1 1.1  How to implement a dynamic set by a direct-address table T . Each key in the universe U
= {0, 1, …, 9} corresponds to an index into the table. The set K  = {2, 3, 5, 8} of actual keys
determines the slots in the table that contain pointers to elements. The other slots, in blue, contain
NIL .
D IRECT -A DDRESS -S EARCH ( T , k )
1 r eturn  T [ k ]
D IRECT -A DDRESS -I NSER T ( T , x )
1 T [ x.key ] = x
D IRECT -A DDRESS -D ELETE ( T , x )
1 T [ x.key ] = NIL
Exer cises
1 1.1-1
A dynamic set S  is represented by a direct-address table T  of length m .
Describe a procedure that finds the maximum element of S . What is the
worst-case performance of your procedure?
1 1.1-2
A bit vector  is simply an array of bits (each either 0 or 1). A bit vector of
length m  takes much less space than an array of m  pointers. Describe how to
use a bit vector to represent a dynamic set of distinct elements drawn from
Page number: 338
the set {0, 1, …, m  − 1} and with no satellite data. Dictionary operations
should run in O (1) time.
1 1.1-3
Suggest how to implement a direct-address table in which the keys of stored
elements do not need to be distinct and the elements can have satellite data.
All three dictionary operations (I NSER T , D ELETE , and S EARCH ) should run in
O (1) time. (Don’ t for get that D ELETE  takes as an ar gument a pointer to an
object to be deleted, not a key .)
★  1 1.1-4
Suppose that you want to implement a dictionary by using direct addressing
on a huge  array . That is, if the array size is m  and the dictionary contains at
most n  elements at any one time, then m  ≫  n . At the start, the array entries
may contain garbage, and initializing the entire array is impractical because
of its size. Describe a scheme for implementing a direct-address dictionary
on a huge array . Each stored object should use O (1) space; the operations
S EARCH , I NSER T , and D ELETE  should take O (1) time each; and initializing
the data structure should take O (1) time. ( Hint:  Use an additional array ,
treated somewhat like a stack whose size is the number of keys actually
stored in the dictionary , to help determine whether a given entry in the huge
array is valid or not.)
1 1.2    Hash tables
The downside of direct addressing is apparent: if the universe U  is lar ge or
infinite, storing a table T  of size | U | may be impractical, or even impossible,
given the memory available on a typical computer . Furthermore, the set K
of keys actually stor ed  may be so small relative to U  that most of the space
allocated for T  would be wasted.
When the set K  of keys stored in a dictionary is much smaller than the
universe U  of all possible keys, a hash table requires much less storage than
a direct-address table. Specifically , the storage requirement reduces to
Θ(| K |) while maintaining the benefit that searching for an element in the
hash table still requires only O (1) time. The catch is that this bound is for
the average-case time ,1 whereas for direct addressing it holds for the worst-
case time .
Page number: 339
W ith direct addressing, an element with key k  is stored in slot k , but with
hashing, we use a hash function  h  to compute the slot number from the key
k , so that the element goes into slot h ( k ). The hash function h  maps the
universe U  of keys into the slots of a hash table  T [0 : m  − 1]:
h  : U  → {0, 1, …, m  − 1},
where the size m  of the hash table is typically much less than | U |. W e say
that an element with key k  hashes  to slot h ( k ), and we also say that h ( k ) is
the hash value  of key k . Figure 1 1.2  illustrates the basic idea. The hash
function reduces the range of array indices and hence the size of the array .
Instead of a size of | U |, the array can have size m . An example of a simple,
but not particularly good, hash function is h ( k ) = k  mod m .
There is one hitch, namely that two keys may hash to the same slot. W e
call this situation a collision . Fortunately , there are ef fective techniques for
resolving the conflict created by collisions.
Of course, the ideal solution is to avoid collisions altogether . W e might
try to achieve this goal by choosing a suitable hash function h . One idea is
to make h  appear to be “random,” thus avoiding collisions or at least
minimizing their number . The very term “to hash,” evoking images of
random mixing and chopping, captures the spirit of this approach. (Of
course, a hash function h  must be deterministic in that a given input k  must
always produce the same output h ( k ).) Because | U | > m , however , there
must be at least two keys that have the same hash value, and avoiding
collisions altogether is impossible. Thus, although a well-designed,
“random”-looking hash function can reduce the number of collisions, we
still need a method for resolving the collisions that do occur .
Page number: 340
Figur e 1 1.2  Using a hash function h  to map keys to hash-table slots. Because keys k 2  and k 5  map to
the same slot, they collide.
The remainder of this section first presents a definition of “independent
uniform hashing,” which captures the simplest notion of what it means for a
hash function to be “random.” It then presents and analyzes the simplest
collision resolution technique, called chaining. Section 1 1.4  introduces an
alternative method for resolving collisions, called open addressing.
Independent uniform hashing
An “ideal” hashing function h  would have, for each possible input k  in the
domain U , an output h ( k ) that is an element randomly and independently
chosen uniformly from the range {0, 1, …, m  − 1}. Once a value h ( k ) is
randomly chosen, each subsequent call to h  with the same input k  yields the
same output h ( k ).
W e call such an ideal hash function an independent uniform hash
function . Such a function is also often called a random oracle  [43]. When
hash tables are implemented with an independent uniform hash function, we
say we are using independent uniform hashing .
Independent uniform hashing is an ideal theoretical abstraction, but it is
not something that can reasonably be implemented in practice. Nonetheless,
we’ll analyze the ef ficiency of hashing under the assumption of independent
uniform hashing and then present ways of achieving useful practical
approximations to this ideal.
Page number: 341
Figur e 1 1.3  Collision resolution by chaining. Each nonempty hash-table slot T [ j ] points to a linked
list of all the keys whose hash value is j . For example, h ( k 1 ) = h ( k 4 ) and h ( k 5 ) = h ( k 2 ) = h ( k 7 ). The
list can be either singly or doubly linked. W e show it as doubly linked because deletion may be faster
that way when the deletion procedure knows which list element (not just which key) is to be deleted.
Collision r esolution by chaining
At a high level, you can think of hashing with chaining as a nonrecursive
form of divide-and-conquer: the input set of n  elements is divided randomly
into m  subsets, each of approximate size n / m . A hash function determines
which subset an element belongs to. Each subset is managed independently
as a list.
Figure 1 1.3  shows the idea behind chaining : each nonempty slot points
to a linked list, and all the elements that hash to the same slot go into that
slot’ s linked list. Slot j  contains a pointer to the head of the list of all stored
elements with hash value j . If there are no such elements, then slot j
contains NIL .
When collisions are resolved by chaining, the dictionary operations are
straightforward to implement. They appear on the next page and use the
linked-list procedures from Section 10.2 . The worst-case running time for
insertion is O (1). The insertion procedure is fast in part because it assumes
that the element x  being inserted is not already present in the table. T o
enforce this assumption, you can search (at additional cost) for an element
whose key is x.key  before inserting. For searching, the worst-case running
time is proportional to the length of the list. (W e’ll analyze this operation
Page number: 342
more closely below .) Deletion takes O (1) time if the lists are doubly linked,
as in Figure 1 1.3 . (Since C HAINED -H ASH -D ELETE  takes as input an element x
and not its key k , no search is needed. If the hash table supports deletion,
then its linked lists should be doubly linked in order to delete an item
quickly . If the lists were only singly linked, then by Exercise 10.2-1,
deletion could take time proportional to the length of the list. W ith singly
linked lists, both deletion and searching would have the same asymptotic
running times.)
C HAINED -H ASH -I NSER T ( T , x )
1 L IST -P REPEND ( T [ h ( x.key )], x )
C HAINED -H ASH -S EARCH ( T , k )
1 r eturn  L IST -S EARCH ( T [ h ( k )], k )
C HAINED -H ASH -D ELETE ( T , x )
1 L IST -D ELETE ( T [ h ( x.key )], x )
Analysis of hashing with chaining
How well does hashing with chaining perform? In particular , how long does
it take to search for an element with a given key?
Given a hash table T  with m  slots that stores n  elements, we define the
load factor  α  for T  as n / m , that is, the average number of elements stored in
a chain. Our analysis will be in terms of α , which can be less than, equal to,
or greater than 1.
The worst-case behavior of hashing with chaining is terrible: all n  keys
hash to the same slot, creating a list of length n . The worst-case time for
searching is thus Θ( n ) plus the time to compute the hash function—no
better than using one linked list for all the elements. W e clearly don’ t use
hash tables for their worst-case performance.
The average-case performance of hashing depends on how well the hash
function h  distributes the set of keys to be stored among the m  slots, on the
average (meaning with respect to the distribution of keys to be hashed and
with respect to the choice of hash function, if this choice is randomized).
Section 1 1.3  discusses these issues, but for now we assume that any given
element is equally likely to hash into any of the m  slots. That is, the hash
function is uniform . W e further assume that where a given element hashes
Page number: 343
to is independent  of where any other elements hash to. In other words, we
assume that we are using independent uniform hashing .
Because hashes of distinct keys are assumed to be independent,
independent uniform hashing is universal : the chance that any two distinct
keys k1  and k2  collide is at most 1/ m . Universality is important in our
analysis and also in the specification of universal families of hash functions,
which we’ll see in Section 1 1.3.2 .
For j  = 0, 1, …, m  − 1, denote the length of the list T [ j ] by nj , so that
and the expected value of nj  is E[ nj ] = α  = n / m .
W e assume that O (1) time suf fices to compute the hash value h ( k ), so
that the time required to search for an element with key k  depends linearly
on the length nh ( k )  of the list T [ h ( k )]. Setting aside the O (1) time required to
compute the hash function and to access slot h ( k ), we’ll consider the
expected number of elements examined by the search algorithm, that is, the
number of elements in the list T [ h ( k )] that the algorithm checks to see
whether any have a key equal to k . W e consider two cases. In the first, the
search is unsuccessful: no element in the table has key k . In the second, the
search successfully finds an element with key k .
Theorem 1 1.1
In a hash table in which collisions are resolved by chaining, an unsuccessful
search takes Θ(1 + α ) time on average, under the assumption of independent
uniform hashing.
Proof    Under the assumption of independent uniform hashing, any key k
not already stored in the table is equally likely to hash to any of the m  slots.
The expected time to search unsuccessfully for a key k  is the expected time
to search to the end of list T [ h ( k )], which has expected length E[ nh ( k ) ] = α .
Thus, the expected number of elements examined in an unsuccessful search
is α , and the total time required (including the time for computing h ( k )) is
Θ(1 + α ).
▪
The situation for a successful search is slightly dif ferent. An
unsuccessful search is equally likely to go to any slot of the hash table. A
Page number: 344
successful search, however , cannot go to an empty slot, since it is for an
element that is present in one of the linked lists. W e assume that the element
searched for is equally likely to be any one of the elements in the table, so
the longer the list, the more likely that the search is for one of its elements.
Even so, the expected search time still turns out to be Θ(1 + α ).
Theorem 1 1.2
In a hash table in which collisions are resolved by chaining, a successful
search takes Θ(1 + α ) time on average, under the assumption of independent
uniform hashing.
Proof    W e assume that the element being searched for is equally likely to
be any of the n  elements stored in the table. The number of elements
examined during a successful search for an element x  is 1 more than the
number of elements that appear before x  in x ’ s list. Because new elements
are placed at the front of the list, elements before x  in the list were all
inserted after x  was inserted. Let xi  denote the i th element inserted into the
table, for i  = 1, 2, …, n , and let ki  = xi .key .
Our analysis uses indicator random variables extensively . For each slot q
in the table and for each pair of distinct keys ki  and kj , we define the
indicator random variable
Xijq  = I {the search is for xi , h ( ki ) = q , and h ( kj ) = q }.
That is, Xijq  = 1 when keys ki  and kj  collide at slot q  and the search is for
element xi . Because Pr{the search is for xi } = 1/ n , Pr{ h ( ki ) = q } = 1/ m ,
Pr{ h ( kj ) = q } = 1/ m , and these events are all independent, we have that
Pr{ Xijq  = 1} = 1/ nm2. Lemma 5.1 on page 130 gives E[ Xijq ] = 1/ nm2.
Next, we define, for each element xj , the indicator random variable
Y j = I { x j  appears in a list prior to the element being searched for}
=
,
since at most one of the Xijq  equals 1, namely when the element xi  being
searched for belongs to the same list as xj  (pointed to by slot q ), and i  < j  (so
that xi  appears after xj  in the list).
Page number: 345
Our final random variable is Z , which counts how many elements appear
in the list prior to the element being searched for:
Because we must count the element being searched for as well as all those
preceding it in its list, we wish to compute E[ Z  + 1]. Using linearity of
expectation (equation (C.24) on page 1 192), we have
Thus, the total time required for a successful search (including the time for
computing the hash function) is Θ(2 + α/ 2 − α/ 2 n ) = Θ(1 + α ).
▪
What does this analysis mean? If the number of elements in the table is
at most proportional to the number of hash-table slots, we have n  = O ( m )
and, consequently , α  = n / m  = O ( m )/ m  = O (1). Thus, searching takes
constant time on average. Since insertion takes O (1) worst-case time and
deletion takes O (1) worst-case time when the lists are doubly linked
(assuming that the list element to be deleted is known, and not just its key),
we can support all dictionary operations in O (1) time on average.
The analysis in the preceding two theorems depends only on two
essential properties of independent uniform hashing: uniformity (each key
is equally likely to hash to any one of the m  slots), and independence (so
any two distinct keys collide with probability 1/ m ).
Exer cises
Page number: 346
1 1.2-1
Y ou use a hash function h  to hash n  distinct keys into an array T  of length
m . Assuming independent uniform hashing, what is the expected number of
collisions? More precisely , what is the expected cardinality of {{ k1 , k2 } : k1
≠ k2  and h ( k1 ) = h ( k2 )}?
1 1.2-2
Consider a hash table with 9 slots and the hash function h ( k ) = k  mod 9.
Demonstrate what happens upon inserting the keys 5, 28, 19, 15, 20, 33, 12,
17, 10 with collisions resolved by chaining.
1 1.2-3
Professor Marley hypothesizes that he can obtain substantial performance
gains by modifying the chaining scheme to keep each list in sorted order .
How does the professor ’ s modification af fect the running time for
successful searches, unsuccessful searches, insertions, and deletions?
1 1.2-4
Suggest how to allocate and deallocate storage for elements within the hash
table itself by creating a “free list”: a linked list of all the unused slots.
Assume that one slot can store a flag and either one element plus a pointer
or two pointers. All dictionary and free-list operations should run in O (1)
expected time. Does the free list need to be doubly linked, or does a singly
linked free list suf fice?
1 1.2-5
Y ou need to store a set of n  keys in a hash table of size m . Show that if the
keys are drawn from a universe U  with | U | > ( n  − 1) m , then U  has a subset
of size n  consisting of keys that all hash to the same slot, so that the worst-
case searching time for hashing with chaining is Θ( n ).
1 1.2-6
Y ou have stored n  keys in a hash table of size m , with collisions resolved by
chaining, and you know the length of each chain, including the length L  of
the longest chain. Describe a procedure that selects a key uniformly at
random from among the keys in the hash table and returns it in expected
time O ( L  · (1 + 1/ α )).
Page number: 347
1 1.3    Hash functions
For hashing to work well, it needs a good hash function. Along with being
ef ficiently computable, what properties does a good hash function have?
How do you design good hash functions?
This section first attempts to answer these questions based on two ad
hoc approaches for creating hash functions: hashing by division and
hashing by multiplication. Although these methods work well for some sets
of input keys, they are limited because they try to provide a single fixed
hash function that works well on any data—an approach called static
hashing .
W e then see that provably good average-case performance for any  data
can be obtained by designing a suitable family  of hash functions and
choosing a hash function at random from this family at runtime,
independent of the data to be hashed. The approach we examine is called
random hashing. A particular kind of random hashing, universal hashing,
works well. As we saw with quicksort in Chapter 7 , randomization is a
powerful algorithmic design tool.
What makes a good hash function?
A good hash function satisfies (approximately) the assumption of
independent uniform hashing: each key is equally likely to hash to any of
the m  slots, independently of where any other keys have hashed to. What
does “equally likely” mean here? If the hash function is fixed, any
probabilities would have to be based on the probability distribution of the
input keys.
Unfortunately , you typically have no way to check this condition, unless
you happen to know the probability distribution from which the keys are
drawn. Moreover , the keys might not be drawn independently .
Occasionally you might know the distribution. For example, if you
know that the keys are random real numbers k  independently and uniformly
distributed in the range 0 ≤ k  < 1, then the hash function
h ( k ) = ⌊ km ⌋
satisfies the condition of independent uniform hashing.
A good static hashing approach derives the hash value in a way that you
expect to be independent of any patterns that might exist in the data. For
Page number: 348
example, the “division method” (discussed in Section 1 1.3.1 ) computes the
hash value as the remainder when the key is divided by a specified prime
number . This method may give good results, if you (somehow) choose a
prime number that is unrelated to any patterns in the distribution of keys.
Random hashing, described in Section 1 1.3.2 , picks the hash function to
be used at random from a suitable family of hashing functions. This
approach removes any need to know anything about the probability
distribution of the input keys, as the randomization necessary for good
average-case behavior then comes from the (known) random process used
to pick the hash function from the family of hash functions, rather than
from the (unknown) process used to create the input keys. W e recommend
that you use random hashing.
Keys ar e integers, vectors, or strings
In practice, a hash function is designed to handle keys that are one of the
following two types:
A short nonnegative integer that fits in a w -bit machine word. T ypical
values for w  would be 32 or 64.
A short vector of nonnegative integers, each of bounded size. For
example, each element might be an 8-bit byte, in which case the
vector is often called a (byte) string. The vector might be of variable
length.
T o begin, we assume that keys are short nonnegative integers. Handling
vector keys is more complicated and discussed in Sections 1 1.3.5  and
1 1.5.2 .
1 1.3.1    Static hashing
Static hashing uses a single, fixed hash function. The only randomization
available is through the (usually unknown) distribution of input keys. This
section discusses two standard approaches for static hashing: the division
method and the multiplication method. Although static hashing is no longer
recommended, the multiplication method also provides a good foundation
for “nonstatic” hashing—better known as random hashing—where the hash
function is chosen at random from a suitable family of hash functions.
Page number: 349
The division method
The division method  for creating hash functions maps a key k  into one of m
slots by taking the remainder of k  divided by m . That is, the hash function is
h ( k ) = k  mod m .
For example, if the hash table has size m  = 12 and the key is k  = 100, then
h ( k ) = 4. Since it requires only a single division operation, hashing by
division is quite fast.
The division method may work well when m  is a prime not too close to
an exact power of 2. There is no guarantee that this method provides good
average-case performance, however , and it may complicate applications
since it constrains the size of the hash tables to be prime.
The multiplication method
The general multiplication method  for creating hash functions operates in
two steps. First, multiply the key k  by a constant A  in the range 0 < A  < 1
and extract the fractional part of kA . Then, multiply this value by m  and
take the floor of the result. That is, the hash function is
h ( k ) = ⌊ m  ( kA  mod 1) ⌋ ,
where “ kA  mod 1” means the fractional part of kA , that is, kA  − ⌊ kA ⌋ . The
general multiplication method has the advantage that the value of m  is not
critical and you can choose it independently of how you choose the
multiplicative constant A .
Page number: 350
Figur e 1 1.4  The multiply-shift method to compute a hash function. The w -bit representation of the
key k  is multiplied by the w -bit value a  = A  · 2w. The ℓ  highest-order bits of the lower w -bit half of
the product form the desired hash value h a ( k ).
The multiply-shift method
In practice, the multiplication method is best in the special case where the
number m  of hash-table slots is an exact power of 2, so that m  = 2ℓ for some
integer ℓ , where ℓ  ≤ w  and w  is the number of bits in a machine word. If you
choose a fixed w -bit positive integer a  = A  2w, where 0 < A  < 1 as in the
multiplication method so that a  is in the range 0 < a  < 2w, you can
implement the function on most computers as follows. W e assume that a
key k  fits into a single w -bit word.
Referring to Figure 1 1.4 , first multiply k  by the w -bit integer a . The
result is a 2 w -bit value r1 2w + r0 , where r1  is the high-order w -bit word of
the product and r0  is the low-order w -bit word of the product. The desired ℓ -
bit hash value consists of the ℓ  most significant bits of r0 . (Since r1  is
ignored, the hash function can be implemented on a computer that produces
only a w -bit product given two w -bit inputs, that is, where the multiplication
operation computes modulo 2w.)
In other words, you define the hash function h  = ha , where
for a fixed nonzero w -bit value a . Since the product ka  of two w -bit words
occupies 2 w  bits, taking this product modulo 2w zeroes out the high-order w
bits ( r1 ), leaving only the low-order w  bits ( r0 ). The ⋙  operator performs a
Page number: 351
logical right shift by w  − ℓ  bits, shifting zeros into the vacated positions on
the left, so that the ℓ  most significant bits of r0  move into the ℓ  rightmost
positions. (It’ s the same as dividing by 2w − ℓ and taking the floor of the
result.) The resulting value equals the ℓ  most significant bits of r0 . The hash
function ha  can be implemented with three machine instructions:
multiplication, subtraction, and logical right shift.
As an example, suppose that k  = 123456, ℓ  = 14, m  = 214 = 16384, and w
= 32. Suppose further that we choose a  = 2654435769 (following a
suggestion of Knuth [ 261 ]). Then ka  = 327706022297664 = (76300 · 232) +
17612864, and so r1  = 76300 and r0  = 17612864. The 14 most significant
bits of r0  yield the value ha ( k ) = 67.
Even though the multiply-shift method is fast, it doesn’ t provide any
guarantee of good average-case performance. The universal hashing
approach presented in the next section provides such a guarantee. A simple
randomized variant of the multiply-shift method works well on the average,
when the program begins by picking a  as a randomly chosen odd integer .
1 1.3.2    Random hashing
Suppose that a malicious adversary chooses the keys to be hashed by some
fixed hash function. Then the adversary can choose n  keys that all hash to
the same slot, yielding an average retrieval time of Θ( n ). Any static hash
function is vulnerable to such terrible worst-case behavior . The only
ef fective way to improve the situation is to choose the hash function
randomly  in a way that is independent  of the keys that are actually going to
be stored. This approach is called random hashing . A special case of this
approach, called universal hashing , can yield provably good performance
on average when collisions are handled by chaining, no matter which keys
the adversary chooses.
T o use random hashing, at the beginning of program execution you
select the hash function at random from a suitable family of functions. As in
the case of quicksort, randomization guarantees that no single input always
evokes worst-case behavior . Because you randomly select the hash
function, the algorithm can behave dif ferently on each execution, even for
the same set of keys to be hashed, guaranteeing good average-case
performance.
Page number: 352
Let H  be a finite family of hash functions that map a given universe U
of keys into the range {0, 1, …, m  − 1}. Such a family is said to be
universal  if for each pair of distinct keys k1 , k2  ∈  U , the number of hash
functions h  ∈  H  for which h ( k1 ) = h ( k2 ) is at most | H |/ m . In other words,
with a hash function randomly chosen from H , the chance of a collision
between distinct keys k1  and k2  is no more than the chance 1/ m  of a
collision if h ( k1 ) and h ( k2 ) were randomly and independently chosen from
the set {0, 1, …, m  − 1}.
Independent uniform hashing is the same as picking a hash function
uniformly at random from a family of mn hash functions, each member of
that family mapping the n  keys to the m  hash values in a dif ferent way .
Every independent uniform random family of hash function is universal,
but the converse need not be true: consider the case where U  = {0, 1, …, m
− 1} and the only hash function in the family is the identity function. The
probability that two distinct keys collide is zero, even though each key is
hashes to a fixed value.
The following corollary to Theorem 1 1.2 on page 279 says that universal
hashing provides the desired payof f: it becomes impossible for an adversary
to pick a sequence of operations that forces the worst-case running time.
Corollary 1 1.3
Using universal hashing and collision resolution by chaining in an initially
empty table with m  slots, it takes Θ( s ) expected time to handle any
sequence of s  I NSER T , S EARCH , and D ELETE  operations containing n  = O ( m )
I NSER T  operations.
Proof    The I NSER T  and D ELETE  operations take constant time. Since the
number n  of insertions is O ( m ), we have that α  = O (1). Furthermore, the
expected time for each S EARCH  operation is O (1), which can be seen by
examining the proof of Theorem 1 1.2. That analysis depends only on
collision probabilities, which are 1/ m  for any pair k1 , k2  of keys by the
choice of an independent uniform hash function in that theorem. Using a
universal family of hash functions here instead of using independent
uniform hashing changes the probability of collision from 1/ m  to at most
1/ m . By linearity of expectation, therefore, the expected time for the entire
Page number: 353
sequence of s  operations is O ( s ). Since each operation takes Ω(1) time, the
Θ( s ) bound follows.
▪
1 1.3.3    Achievable pr operties of random hashing
There is a rich literature on the properties a family H  of hash functions can
have, and how they relate to the ef ficiency of hashing. W e summarize a few
of the most interesting ones here.
Let H  be a family of hash functions, each with domain U  and range {0,
1, …, m  − 1}, and let h  be any hash function that is picked uniformly at
random from H . The probabilities mentioned are probabilities over the
picks of h .
The family H  is uniform  if for any key k  in U  and any slot q  in the
range {0, 1, …, m  − 1}, the probability that h ( k ) = q  is 1/ m .
The family H  is universal  if for any distinct keys k1  and k2  in U , the
probability that h ( k1 ) = h ( k2 ) is at most 1/ m .
The family H  of hash functions is ϵ -universal  if for any distinct
keys k1  and k2  in U , the probability that h ( k1 ) = h ( k2 ) is at most ϵ .
Therefore, a universal family of hash functions is also 1/ m -universal.2
The family H  is d-independent  if for any distinct keys k1 , k2 , …, kd
in U  and any slots q1 , q2 , …, qd , not necessarily distinct, in {0, 1, …,
m  − 1} the probability that h ( ki ) = qi  for i  = 1, 2, …, d  is 1/ md.
Universal hash-function families are of particular interest, as they are the
simplest type supporting provably ef ficient hash-table operations for any
input data set. Many other interesting and desirable properties, such as those
noted above, are also possible and allow for ef ficient specialized hash-table
operations.
1 1.3.4    Designing a universal family of hash functions
This section present two ways to design a universal (or ϵ -universal) family
of hash functions: one based on number theory and another based on a
randomized variant of the multiply-shift method presented in Section
Page number: 354
1 1.3.1 . The first method is a bit easier to prove universal, but the second
method is newer and faster in practice.
A universal family of hash functions based on number theory
W e can design a universal family of hash functions using a little number
theory . Y ou may wish to refer to Chapter 31  if you are unfamiliar with basic
concepts in number theory .
Begin by choosing a prime number p  lar ge enough so that every possible
key k  lies in the range 0 to p  − 1, inclusive. W e assume here that p  has a
“reasonable” length. (See Section 1 1.3.5  for a discussion of methods for
handling long input keys, such as variable-length strings.) Let ℤp  denote the
set {0, 1, …, p  − 1}, and let 
  denote the set {1, 2, …, p  − 1}. Since p  is
prime, we can solve equations modulo p  with the methods given in Chapter
31 . Because the size of the universe of keys is greater than the number of
slots in the hash table (otherwise, just use direct addressing), we have p  >
m .
Given any 
  and any b  ∈  ℤp , define the hash function hab  as a
linear transformation followed by reductions modulo p  and then modulo m :
For example, with p  = 17 and m  = 6, we have
h 3,4 (8) = ((3 · 8 + 4) mod 17) mod 6
= (28 mod 17) mod 6
= 1 1 mod 6
= 5.
Given p  and m , the family of all such hash functions is
Each hash function hab  maps ℤp  to ℤm . This family of hash functions has
the nice property that the size m  of the output range (which is the size of the
hash table) is arbitrary—it need not be prime. Since you can choose from
among p  − 1 values for a  and p  values for b , the family Hpm  contains p ( p  −
1) hash functions.
Theorem 1 1.4
Page number: 355
The family Hpm  of hash functions defined by equations (1 1.3) and (1 1.4) is
universal.
Proof    Consider two distinct keys k1  and k2  from ℤp , so that k1  ≠ k2 . For a
given hash function hab , let
r1  = ( ak1  + b ) mod p ,
r2  = ( ak2  + b ) mod p .
W e first note that r1  ≠ r2 . Why? Since we have r1  − r2  = a ( k1  − k2 ) (mod p ),
it follows that r1  ≠ r2  because p  is prime and both a  and ( k1  − k2 ) are
nonzero modulo p . By Theorem 31.6 on page 908, their product must also
be nonzero modulo p . Therefore, when computing any hab  ∈  Hpm , distinct
inputs k1  and k2  map to distinct values r1  and r2  modulo p , and there are no
collisions yet at the “mod p  level.” Moreover , each of the possible p ( p  − 1)
choices for the pair ( a , b ) with a  ≠ 0 yields a differ ent  resulting pair ( r1 , r2 )
with r1  ≠ r2 , since we can solve for a  and b  given r1  and r2 :
a  = (( r  − r2 )(( k1  − k2 )−1 mod p )) mod p ,
b  = ( r1  − ak1 ) mod p ,
where (( k1  − k2 )−1 mod p ) denotes the unique multiplicative inverse,
modulo p , of k1  − k2 . For each of the p  possible values of r1 , there are only
p  − 1 possible values of r2  that do not equal r1 , making only p ( p  − 1)
possible pairs ( r1 , r2 ) with r1  ≠ r2 . Therefore, there is a one-to-one
correspondence between pairs ( a , b ) with a  ≠ 0 and pairs ( r1 , r2 ) with r1  ≠
r2 . Thus, for any given pair of distinct inputs k1  and k2 , if we pick ( a , b )
uniformly at random from 
 , the resulting pair ( r1 , r2 ) is equally
likely to be any pair of distinct values modulo p .
Therefore, the probability that distinct keys k1  and k2  collide is equal to
the probability that r1  = r2  (mod m ) when r1  and r2  are randomly chosen as
distinct values modulo p . For a given value of r1 , of the p  − 1 possible
remaining values for r2 , the number of values r2  such that r2  ≠ r1  and r2  = r1
(mod m ) is at most
Page number: 356
The probability that r2  collides with r1  when reduced modulo m  is at most
(( p  − 1)/ m )/( p  − 1) = 1/ m , since r2  is equally likely to be any of the p  − 1
values in Zp  that are dif ferent from r1 , but at most ( p  − 1)/ m  of those values
are equivalent to r1  modulo m .
Therefore, for any pair of distinct values k1 , k2  ∈  ℤp ,
Pr{ hab ( k1 ) = hab ( k2 )} ≤ 1/ m ,
so that Hpm  is indeed universal.
▪
A 2/ m -universal family of hash functions based on the multiply-shift
method
W e recommend that in practice you use the following hash-function family
based on the multiply-shift method. It is exceptionally ef ficient and
(although we omit the proof) provably 2/ m -universal. Define H  to be the
family of multiply-shift hash functions with odd constants a :
Theorem 1 1.5
The family of hash functions H  given by equation (1 1.5) is 2/ m -universal.
▪
That is, the probability that any two distinct keys collide is at most 2/ m .
In many practical situations, the speed of computing the hash function more
than compensates for the higher upper bound on the probability that two
distinct keys collide when compared with a universal hash function.
1 1.3.5    Hashing long inputs such as vectors or strings
Sometimes hash function inputs are so long that they cannot be easily
encoded modulo a reasonably sized prime number p  or encoded within a
single word of, say , 64 bits. As an example, consider the class of vectors,
Page number: 357
such as vectors of 8-bit bytes (which is how strings in many programming
languages are stored). A vector might have an arbitrary nonnegative length,
in which case the length of the input to the hash function may vary from
input to input.
Number -theor etic appr oaches
One way to design good hash functions for variable-length inputs is to
extend the ideas used in Section 1 1.3.4  to design universal hash functions.
Exercise 1 1.3-6 explores one such approach.
Cryptographic hashing
Another way to design a good hash function for variable-length inputs is to
use a hash function designed for cryptographic applications. Cryptographic
hash functions  are complex pseudorandom functions, designed for
applications requiring properties beyond those needed here, but are robust,
widely implemented, and usable as hash functions for hash tables.
A cryptographic hash function takes as input an arbitrary byte string and
returns a fixed-length output. For example, the NIST standard deterministic
cryptographic hash function SHA-256 [ 346 ] produces a 256-bit (32-byte)
output for any input.
Some chip manufacturers include instructions in their CPU architectures
to provide fast implementations of some cryptographic functions. Of
particular interest are instructions that ef ficiently implement rounds of the
Advanced Encryption Standard (AES), the “AES-NI” instructions. These
instructions execute in a few tens of nanoseconds, which is generally fast
enough for use with hash tables. A message authentication code such as
CBC-MAC based on AES and the use of the AES-NI instructions could be
a useful and ef ficient hash function. W e don’ t pursue the potential use of
specialized instruction sets further here.
Cryptographic hash functions are useful because they provide a way of
implementing an approximate version of a random oracle. As noted earlier ,
a random oracle is equivalent to an independent uniform hash function
family . From a theoretical point of view , a random oracle is an unachievable
ideal: a deterministic function that provides a randomly selected output for
each input. Because it is deterministic, it provides the same output if
queried again for the same input. From a practical point of view ,
Page number: 358
constructions of hash function families based on cryptographic hash
functions are sensible substitutes for random oracles.
There are many ways to use a cryptographic hash function as a hash
function. For example, we could define
h ( k ) = SHA-256( k ) mod m .
T o define a family of such hash functions one may prepend a “salt” string a
to the input before hashing it, as in
ha ( k ) = SHA-256( a  ‖  k ) mod m ,
where a  ‖  k  denotes the string formed by concatenating the strings a  and k .
The literature on message authentication codes (MACs) provides additional
approaches.
Cryptographic approaches to hash-function design are becoming more
practical as computers arrange their memories in hierarchies of dif fering
capacities and speeds. Section 1 1.5  discusses one hash-function design
based on the RC6 encryption method.
Exer cises
1 1.3-1
Y ou wish to search a linked list of length n , where each element contains a
key k  along with a hash value h ( k ). Each key is a long character string. How
might you take advantage of the hash values when searching the list for an
element with a given key?
1 1.3-2
Y ou hash a string of r  characters into m  slots by treating it as a radix-128
number and then using the division method. Y ou can represent the number
m  as a 32-bit computer word, but the string of r  characters, treated as a
radix-128 number , takes many words. How can you apply the division
method to compute the hash value of the character string without using
more than a constant number of words of storage outside the string itself?
1 1.3-3
Consider a version of the division method in which h ( k ) = k  mod m , where
m  = 2p − 1 and k  is a character string interpreted in radix 2p. Show that if
string x  can be converted to string y  by permuting its characters, then x  and
Page number: 359
y  hash to the same value. Give an example of an application in which this
property would be undesirable in a hash function.
1 1.3-4
Consider a hash table of size m  = 1000 and a corresponding hash function
h ( k ) = ⌊ m  ( kA  mod 1) ⌋  for 
 . Compute the locations to which
the keys 61, 62, 63, 64, and 65 are mapped.
★  1 1.3-5
Show that any ϵ -universal family H  of hash functions from a finite set U
to a finite set Q  has ϵ  ≥ 1/| Q | − 1/| U |.
★  1 1.3-6
Let U  be the set of d -tuples of values drawn from ℤp , and let Q  = ℤp , where
p  is prime. Define the hash function hb  : U  → Q  for b  ∈  ℤp  on an input d -
tuple 〈 a0 , a1 , …, ad −1〉  from U  as
and let H  = { hb  : b  ∈  ℤp }. Ar gue that H  is ϵ -universal for ϵ  = ( d  − 1)/ p .
( Hint:  See Exercise 31.4-4.)
1 1.4    Open addr essing
This section describes open addressing, a method for collision resolution
that, unlike chaining, does not make use of storage outside of the hash table
itself. In open addressing , all elements occupy the hash table itself. That is,
each table entry contains either an element of the dynamic set or NIL . No
lists or elements are stored outside the table, unlike in chaining. Thus, in
open addressing, the hash table can “fill up” so that no further insertions
can be made. One consequence is that the load factor α  can never exceed 1.
Collisions are handled as follows: when a new element is to be inserted
into the table, it is placed in its “first-choice” location if possible. If that
location is already occupied, the new element is placed in its “second-
choice” location. The process continues until an empty slot is found in
Page number: 360
which to place the new element. Dif ferent elements have dif ferent
preference orders for the locations.
T o search for an element, systematically examine the preferred table
slots for that element, in order of decreasing preference, until either you
find the desired element or you find an empty slot and thus verify that the
element is not in the table.
Of course, you could use chaining and store the linked lists inside the
hash table, in the otherwise unused hash-table slots (see Exercise 1 1.2-4),
but the advantage of open addressing is that it avoids pointers altogether .
Instead of following pointers, you compute the sequence of slots to be
examined. The memory freed by not storing pointers provides the hash
table with a lar ger number of slots in the same amount of memory ,
potentially yielding fewer collisions and faster retrieval.
T o perform insertion using open addressing, successively examine, or
probe , the hash table until you find an empty slot in which to put the key .
Instead of being fixed in the order 0, 1, …, m  − 1 (which implies a Θ( n )
search time), the sequence of positions probed depends upon the key being
inserted. T o determine which slots to probe, the hash function includes the
probe number (starting from 0) as a second input. Thus, the hash function
becomes
h  : U  × {0, 1, …, m  − 1} → {0, 1, …, m  − 1}.
Open addressing requires that for every key k , the probe sequence  〈 h ( k , 0),
h ( k , 1), …, h ( k , m  − 1) 〉  be a permutation of 〈 0, 1, …, m  − 1 〉 , so that every
hash-table position is eventually considered as a slot for a new key as the
table fills up. The H ASH -I NSER T  procedure on the following page assumes
that the elements in the hash table T  are keys with no satellite information:
the key k  is identical to the element containing key k . Each slot contains
either a key or NIL  (if the slot is empty). The H ASH -I NSER T  procedure takes
as input a hash table T  and a key k  that is assumed to be not already present
in the hash table. It either returns the slot number where it stores key k  or
flags an error because the hash table is already full.
H ASH -I NSER T ( T , k )
1 i  = 0
2 r epeat
3 q  = h ( k , i )
4 if  T [ q ] == NIL
Page number: 361
5 T [ q ] = k
6 r eturn  q
7 else  i  = i  + 1
8 until  i  == m
9 err or  “hash table overflow”
H ASH -S EARCH ( T , k )
1 i  = 0
2 r epeat
3 q  = h ( k , i )
4 if  T [ q ] == k
5 r eturn  q
6 i  = i  + 1
7 until  T [ q ] == NIL  or i  == m
8 r eturn  NIL
The algorithm for searching for key k  probes the same sequence of slots
that the insertion algorithm examined when key k  was inserted. Therefore,
the search can terminate (unsuccessfully) when it finds an empty slot, since
k  would have been inserted there and not later in its probe sequence. The
procedure H ASH -S EARCH  takes as input a hash table T  and a key k , returning
q  if it finds that slot q  contains key k , or NIL  if key k  is not present in table T .
Deletion from an open-address hash table is tricky . When you delete a
key from slot q , it would be a mistake to mark that slot as empty by simply
storing NIL  in it. If you did, you might be unable to retrieve any key k  for
which slot q  was probed and found occupied when k  was inserted. One way
to solve this problem is by marking the slot, storing in it the special value
DELETED  instead of NIL . The H ASH -I NSER T  procedure then has to treat such a
slot as empty so that it can insert a new key there. The H ASH -S EARCH
procedure passes over DELETED  values while searching, since slots
containing DELETED  were filled when the key being searched for was
inserted. Using the special value DELETED , however , means that search times
no longer depend on the load factor α , and for this reason chaining is
frequently selected as a collision resolution technique when keys must be
deleted. There is a simple special case of open addressing, linear probing,
that avoids the need to mark slots with DELETED . Section 1 1.5.1  shows how
to delete from a hash table when using linear probing.
In our analysis, we assume independent uniform permutation hashing
(also confusingly known as uniform hashing  in the literature): the probe
sequence of each key is equally likely to be any of the m ! permutations of
Page number: 362
〈 0, 1, …, m  − 1 〉 . Independent uniform permutation hashing generalizes the
notion of independent uniform hashing defined earlier to a hash function
that produces not just a single slot number , but a whole probe sequence.
T rue independent uniform permutation hashing is dif ficult to implement,
however , and in practice suitable approximations (such as double hashing,
defined below) are used.
W e’ll examine both double hashing and its special case, linear probing.
These techniques guarantee that 〈 h ( k , 0), h ( k , 1), …, h ( k , m  − 1) 〉  is a
permutation of 〈 0, 1, …, m  − 1 〉  for each key k . (Recall that the second
parameter to the hash function h  is the probe number .) Neither double
hashing nor linear probing meets the assumption of independent uniform
permutation hashing, however . Double hashing cannot generate more than
m2 dif ferent probe sequences (instead of the m ! that independent uniform
permutation hashing requires). Nonetheless, double hashing has a lar ge
number of possible probe sequences and, as you might expect, seems to
give good results. Linear probing is even more restricted, capable of
generating only m  dif ferent probe sequences.
Double hashing
Double hashing of fers one of the best methods available for open
addressing because the permutations produced have many of the
characteristics of randomly chosen permutations. Double hashing  uses a
hash function of the form
h ( k , i ) = ( h1 ( k ) + ih2 ( k )) mod m ,
where both h1  and h2  are auxiliary hash functions . The initial probe goes to
position T [ h1 ( k )], and successive probe positions are of fset from previous
positions by the amount h2 ( k ), modulo m . Thus, the probe sequence here
depends in two ways upon the key k , since the initial probe position h1 ( k ),
the step size h2 ( k ), or both, may vary . Figure 1 1.5  gives an example of
insertion by double hashing.
In order for the entire hash table to be searched, the value h2 ( k ) must be
relatively prime to the hash-table size m . (See Exercise 1 1.4-5.) A
convenient way to ensure this condition is to let m  be an exact power of 2
and to design h2  so that it always produces an odd number . Another way is
Page number: 363
to let m  be prime and to design h2  so that it always returns a positive integer
less than m . For example, you could choose m  prime and let
Figur e 1 1.5  Insertion by double hashing. The hash table has size 13 with h 1 ( k ) = k  mod 13 and h 2 ( k )
= 1 + ( k  mod 1 1). Since 14 = 1 (mod 13) and 14 = 3 (mod 1 1), the key 14 goes into empty slot 9, after
slots 1 and 5 are examined and found to be occupied.
h1 ( k ) = k  mod m ,
h2 ( k ) = 1 + ( k  mod m ′),
where m ′ is chosen to be slightly less than m  (say , m  − 1). For example, if k
= 123456, m  = 701, and m ′ = 700, then h1 ( k ) = 80 and h2 ( k ) = 257, so that
the first probe goes to position 80, and successive probes examine every
257th slot (modulo m ) until the key has been found or every slot has been
examined.
Although values of m  other than primes or exact powers of 2 can in
principle be used with double hashing, in practice it becomes more dif ficult
to ef ficiently generate h2 ( k ) (other than choosing h2 ( k ) = 1, which gives
linear probing) in a way that ensures that it is relatively prime to m , in part
because the relative density ϕ ( m )/ m  of such numbers for general m  may be
small (see equation (31.25) on page 921).
When m  is prime or an exact power of 2, double hashing produces
Θ( m2) probe sequences, since each possible ( h1 ( k ), h2 ( k )) pair yields a
Page number: 364
distinct probe sequence. As a result, for such values of m , double hashing
appears to perform close to the “ideal” scheme of independent uniform
permutation hashing.
Linear pr obing
Linear probing , a special case of double hashing, is the simplest open-
addressing approach to resolving collisions. As with double hashing, an
auxiliary hash function h1  determines the first probe position h1 ( k ) for
inserting an element. If slot T [ h1 ( k )] is already occupied, probe the next
position T [ h1 ( k ) + 1]. Keep going as necessary , on up to slot T [ m  − 1], and
then wrap around to slots T [0], T [1], and so on, but never going past slot
T [ h1 ( k ) − 1]. T o view linear probing as a special case of double hashing, just
set the double-hashing step function h2  to be fixed at 1: h2 ( k ) = 1 for all k .
That is, the hash function is
for i  = 0, 1, …, m  − 1. The value of h1 ( k ) determines the entire probe
sequence, and so assuming that h1 ( k ) can take on any value in {0, 1, …, m  −
1}, linear probing allows only m  distinct probe sequences.
W e’ll revisit linear probing in Section 1 1.5.1 .
Analysis of open-addr ess hashing
As in our analysis of chaining in Section 1 1.2 , we analyze open addressing
in terms of the load factor α  = n / m  of the hash table. W ith open addressing,
at most one element occupies each slot, and thus n  ≤ m , which implies α  ≤
1. The analysis below requires α  to be strictly less than 1, and so we assume
that at least one slot is empty . Because deleting from an open-address hash
table does not really free up a slot, we assume as well that no deletions
occur .
For the hash function, we assume independent uniform permutation
hashing. In this idealized scheme, the probe sequence 〈 h ( k , 0), h ( k , 1), …,
h ( k , m  − 1) 〉  used to insert or search for each key k  is equally likely to be
any permutation of 〈 0, 1, …, m  − 1 〉 . Of course, any given key has a unique
fixed probe sequence associated with it. What we mean here is that,
considering the probability distribution on the space of keys and the
Page number: 365
operation of the hash function on the keys, each possible probe sequence is
equally likely .
W e now analyze the expected number of probes for hashing with open
addressing under the assumption of independent uniform permutation
hashing, beginning with the expected number of probes made in an
unsuccessful search (assuming, as stated above, that α  < 1).
The bound proven, of 1/(1 − α ) = 1 + α  + α2 + α3 + ⋯ , has an intuitive
interpretation. The first probe always occurs. W ith probability
approximately α , the first probe finds an occupied slot, so that a second
probe happens. W ith probability approximately α2, the first two slots are
occupied so that a third probe ensues, and so on.
Theorem 1 1.6
Given an open-address hash table with load factor α  = n / m  < 1, the expected
number of probes in an unsuccessful search is at most 1/(1 − α ), assuming
independent uniform permutation hashing and no deletions.
Proof    In an unsuccessful search, every probe but the last accesses an
occupied slot that does not contain the desired key , and the last slot probed
is empty . Let the random variable X  denote the number of probes made in
an unsuccessful search, and define the event Ai , for i  = 1, 2, …, as the event
that an i th probe occurs and it is to an occupied slot. Then the event { X  ≥ i }
is the intersection of events A1  ⋂  A2  ⋂  ⋯  ⋂  Ai −1 . W e bound Pr{ X  ≥ i } by
bounding Pr{ A1  ⋂  A2  ⋂  ⋯  ⋂  Ai −1 }. By Exercise C.2-5 on page 1 190,
Pr{ A 1  ⋂  A 2  ⋂  ⋯  ⋂  A i −1 } = Pr{ A 1 } · Pr{ A 2  | A 1 } · Pr { A 3  | A 1  ⋂  A 2 } ⋯
Pr{ A i −1  | A 1  ⋂  A 2  ⋂  ⋯  ⋂  A i −2 }.
Since there are n  elements and m  slots, Pr{ A1 } = n / m . For j  > 1, the
probability that there is a j th probe and it is to an occupied slot, given that
the first j  − 1 probes were to occupied slots, is ( n  − j  + 1)/( m  − j  + 1). This
probability follows because the j th probe would be finding one of the
remaining ( n  − ( j  − 1)) elements in one of the ( m  − ( j  − 1)) unexamined
slots, and by the assumption of independent uniform permutation hashing,
the probability is the ratio of these quantities. Since n  < m  implies that ( n  −
j )/( m  − j ) ≤ n / m  for all j  in the range 0 ≤ j  < m , it follows that for all i  in the
range 1 ≤ i  ≤ m , we have
Page number: 366
The product in the first line has i  − 1 factors. When i  = 1, the product is 1,
the identity for multiplication, and we get Pr{ X  ≥ 1} = 1, which makes
sense, since there must always be at least 1 probe. If each of the first n
probes is to an occupied slot, then all occupied slots have been probed.
Then, the ( n  + 1)st probe must be to an empty slot, which gives Pr{ X  ≥ i } =
0 for i  > n  + 1. Now , we use equation (C.28) on page 1 193 to bound the
expected number of probes:
▪
If α  is a constant, Theorem 1 1.6 predicts that an unsuccessful search runs
in O (1) time. For example, if the hash table is half full, the average number
of probes in an unsuccessful search is at most 1/(1 − .5) = 2. If it is 90%
full, the average number of probes is at most 1/(1 − .9) = 10.
Theorem 1 1.6 yields almost immediately how well the H ASH -I NSER T
procedure performs.
Corollary 1 1.7
Inserting an element into an open-address hash table with load factor α ,
where α  < 1, requires at most 1/(1 − α ) probes on average, assuming
independent uniform permutation hashing and no deletions.
Page number: 367
Proof    An element is inserted only if there is room in the table, and thus α
< 1. Inserting a key requires an unsuccessful search followed by placing the
key into the first empty slot found. Thus, the expected number of probes is
at most 1/(1 − α ).
▪
It takes a little more work to compute the expected number of probes for
a successful search.
Theorem 1 1.8
Given an open-address hash table with load factor α  < 1, the expected
number of probes in a successful search is at most
assuming independent uniform permutation hashing with no deletions and
assuming that each key in the table is equally likely to be searched for .
Proof    A search for a key k  reproduces the same probe sequence as when
the element with key k  was inserted. If k  was the ( i  + 1)st key inserted into
the hash table, then the load factor at the time it was inserted was i / m , and
so by Corollary 1 1.7, the expected number of probes made in a search for k
is at most 1/(1 − i / m ) = m /( m  − i ). A veraging over all n  keys in the hash
table gives us the expected number of probes in a successful search:
▪
Page number: 368
If the hash table is half full, the expected number of probes in a
successful search is less than 1.387. If the hash table is 90% full, the
expected number of probes is less than 2.559. If α  = 1, then in an
unsuccessful search, all m  slots must be probed. Exercise 1 1.4-4 asks you to
analyze a successful search when α  = 1.
Exer cises
1 1.4-1
Consider inserting the keys 10, 22, 31, 4, 15, 28, 17, 88, 59 into a hash table
of length m  = 1 1 using open addressing. Illustrate the result of inserting
these keys using linear probing with h ( k , i ) = ( k  + i ) mod m  and using
double hashing with h1 ( k ) = k  and h2 ( k ) = 1 + ( k  mod ( m  − 1)).
1 1.4-2
W rite pseudocode for H ASH -D ELETE  that fills the deleted key’ s slot with the
special value DELETED , and modify H ASH -S EARCH  and H ASH -I NSER T  as
needed to handle DELETED .
1 1.4-3
Consider an open-address hash table with independent uniform permutation
hashing and no deletions. Give upper bounds on the expected number of
probes in an unsuccessful search and on the expected number of probes in a
successful search when the load factor is 3/4 and when it is 7/8.
1 1.4-4
Show that the expected number of probes required for a successful search
when α  = 1 (that is, when n  = m ), is Hm , the m th harmonic number .
★  1 1.4-5
Show that, with double hashing, if m  and h2 ( k ) have greatest common
divisor d  ≥ 1 for some key k , then an unsuccessful search for key k
examines (1/ d )th of the hash table before returning to slot h1 ( k ). Thus, when
d  = 1, so that m  and h2 ( k ) are relatively prime, the search may examine the
entire hash table. ( Hint:  See Chapter 31 .)
★  1 1.4-6
Page number: 369
Consider an open-address hash table with a load factor α . Approximate the
nonzero value α  for which the expected number of probes in an
unsuccessful search equals twice the expected number of probes in a
successful search. Use the upper bounds given by Theorems 1 1.6 and 1 1.8
for these expected numbers of probes.
1 1.5    Practical considerations
Ef ficient hash table algorithms are not only of theoretical interest, but also
of immense practical importance. Constant factors can matter . For this
reason, this section discusses two aspects of modern CPUs that are not
included in the standard RAM model presented in Section 2.2 :
Memory hierar chies:  The memory of modern CPUs has a number of
levels, from the fast registers, through one or more levels of cache
memory , to the main-memory level. Each successive level stores more
data than the previous level, but access is slower . As a consequence, a
complex computation (such as a complicated hash function) that works
entirely within the fast registers can take less time than a single read
operation from main memory . Furthermore, cache memory is or ganized in
cache blocks  of (say) 64 bytes each, which are always fetched together
from main memory . There is a substantial benefit for ensuring that
memory usage is local: reusing the same cache block is much more
ef ficient than fetching a dif ferent cache block from main memory .
The standard RAM model measures ef ficiency of a hash-table operation
by counting the number of hash-table slots probed. In practice, this metric
is only a crude approximation to the truth, since once a cache block is in
the cache, successive probes to that cache block are much faster than
probes that must access main memory .
Advanced instruction sets:  Modern CPUs may have sophisticated
instruction sets that implement advanced primitives useful for encryption
or other forms of cryptography . These instructions may be useful in the
design of exceptionally ef ficient hash functions.
Section 1 1.5.1  discusses linear probing, which becomes the collision-
resolution method of choice in the presence of a memory hierarchy . Section
Page number: 370
1 1.5.2  suggests how to construct “advanced” hash functions based on
cryptographic primitives, suitable for use on computers with hierarchical
memory models.
1 1.5.1    Linear pr obing
Linear probing is often disparaged because of its poor performance in the
standard RAM model. But linear probing excels for hierarchical memory
models, because successive probes are usually to the same cache block of
memory .
Deletion with linear pr obing
Another reason why linear probing is often not used in practice is that
deletion seems complicated or impossible without using the special
DELETED  value. Y et we’ll now see that deletion from a hash table based on
linear probing is not all that dif ficult, even without the DELETED  marker . The
deletion procedure works for linear probing, but not for open-address
probing in general, because with linear probing keys all follow the same
simple cyclic probing sequence (albeit with dif ferent starting points).
The deletion procedure relies on an “inverse” function to the linear -
probing hash function h ( k , i ) = ( h1 ( k ) + i ) mod m , which maps a key k  and a
probe number i  to a slot number in the hash table. The inverse function g
maps a key k  and a slot number q , where 0 ≤ q  < m , to the probe number
that reaches slot q :
g ( k , q ) = ( q  − h1 ( k )) mod m .
If h ( k , i ) = q , then g ( k , q ) = i , and so h ( k , g ( k , q )) = q .
The procedure L INEAR -P ROBING -H ASH -D ELETE  on the facing page
deletes the key stored in position q  from hash table T . Figure 1 1.6  shows
how it works. The procedure first deletes the key in position q  by setting
T [ q ] to NIL  in line 2. It then searches for a slot q ′ (if any) that contains a key
that should be moved to the slot q  just vacated by key k . Line 9 asks the
critical question: does the key k ′ in slot q ′ need to be moved to the vacated
slot q  in order to preserve the accessibility of k ′? If g ( k ′, q ) < g ( k ′, q ′), then
during the insertion of k ′ into the table, slot q  was examined but found to be
already occupied. But now slot q , where a search will look for k ′, is empty .
In this case, key k ′ moves to slot q  in line 10, and the search continues, to
Page number: 371
see whether any later key also needs to be moved to the slot q ′ that was just
freed up when k ′ moved.
Figur e 1 1.6  Deletion in a hash table that uses linear probing. The hash table has size 10 with h 1 ( k ) =
k  mod 10. (a)  The hash table after inserting keys in the order 74, 43, 93, 18, 82, 38, 92. (b)  The hash
table after deleting the key 43 from slot 3. Key 93 moves up to slot 3 to keep it accessible, and then
key 92 moves up to slot 5 just vacated by key 93. No other keys need to be moved.
L INEAR -P ROBING -H ASH -D ELETE ( T , q )
  1 while  TRUE
  2 T [ q ] = NIL //  make slot q  empty
  3 q ′ = q //  starting point for search
  4 r epeat
  5 q ′ = ( q ′ + 1) mod m //  next slot number with linear probing
  6 k ′ = T [ q ′] //  next key to try to move
  7 if  k ′ == NIL
  8 r eturn //  return when an empty slot is found
  9 until  g ( k ′, q ) < g ( k ′, q ′) //  was empty slot q  probed before q ′?
10 T [ q ] = k ′ //  move k ′ into slot q
1 1 q  = q ′ //  free up slot q ′
Analysis of linear pr obing
Linear probing is popular to implement, but it exhibits a phenomenon
known as primary clustering . Long runs of occupied slots build up,
increasing the average search time. Clusters arise because an empty slot
preceded by i  full slots gets filled next with probability ( i  + 1)/ m . Long runs
of occupied slots tend to get longer , and the average search time increases.
Page number: 372
In the standard RAM model, primary clustering is a problem, and
general double hashing usually performs better than linear probing. By
contrast, in a hierarchical memory model, primary clustering is a beneficial
property , as elements are often stored together in the same cache block.
Searching proceeds through one cache block before advancing to search the
next cache block. W ith linear probing, the running time for a key k  of
H ASH -I NSER T , H ASH -S EARCH , or L INEAR -P ROBING -H ASH -D ELETE  is at most
proportional to the distance from h1 ( k ) to the next empty slot.
The following theorem is due to Pagh et al. [ 351 ]. A more recent proof
is given by Thorup [ 438 ]. W e omit the proof here. The need for 5-
independence is by no means obvious; see the cited proofs.
Theorem 1 1.9
If h1  is 5-independent and α  ≤ 2/3, then it takes expected constant time to
search for , insert, or delete a key in a hash table using linear probing.
▪
(Indeed, the expected operation time is O (1/ ϵ  2) for α  = 1 − ϵ .)
★  1 1.5.2 Hash functions for hierar chical memory models
This section illustrates an approach for designing ef ficient hash tables in a
modern computer system having a memory hierarchy .
Because of the memory hierarchy , linear probing is a good choice for
resolving collisions, as probe sequences are sequential and tend to stay
within cache blocks. But linear probing is most ef ficient when the hash
function is complex (for example, 5-independent as in Theorem 1 1.9).
Fortunately , having a memory hierarchy means that complex hash functions
can be implemented ef ficiently .
As noted in Section 1 1.3.5 , one approach is to use a cryptographic hash
function such as SHA-256. Such functions are complex and suf ficiently
random for hash table applications. On machines with specialized
instructions, cryptographic functions can be quite ef ficient.
Instead, we present here a simple hash function based only on addition,
multiplication, and swapping the halves of a word. This function can be
implemented entirely within the fast registers, and on a machine with a
memory hierarchy , its latency is small compared with the time taken to
Page number: 373
access a random slot of the hash table. It is related to the RC6 encryption
algorithm and can for practical purposes be considered a “random oracle.”
The wee hash function
Let w  denote the word size of the machine (e.g., w  = 64), assumed to be
even, and let a  and b  be w -bit unsigned (nonnegative) integers such that a  is
odd. Let swap( x ) denote the w -bit result of swapping the two w/ 2-bit halves
of w -bit input x . That is,
swap( x ) = ( x  ⋙  ( w /2)) + ( x  ⋘  ( w /2))
where “ ⋙ ” is “logical right shift” (as in equation (1 1.2)) and “ ⋘  is “left
shift.” Define
fa ( k ) = swap((2 k2 + ak ) mod 2w).
Thus, to compute fa ( k ), evaluate the quadratic function 2 k2 + ak  modulo 2w
and then swap the left and right halves of the result.
Let r  denote a desired number of “rounds” for the computation of the
hash function. W e’ll use r  = 4, but the hash function is well defined for any
nonnegative r . Denote by 
  the result of iterating fa  a total of r  times
(that is, r  rounds) starting with input value k . For any odd a  and any r  ≥ 0,
the function 
 , although complicated, is one-to-one (see Exercise 1 1.5-1).
A cryptographer would view 
  as a simple block cipher operating on w -
bit input blocks, with r  rounds and key a .
W e first define the wee hash function h  for short inputs, where by
“short” we means “whose length t  is at most w -bits,” so that the input fits
within one computer word. W e would like inputs of dif ferent lengths to be
hashed dif ferently . The wee hash function  ha , b , t , r ( k ) for parameters a , b , and
r  on t -bit input k  is defined as
That is, the hash value for t -bit input k  is obtained by applying 
  to k  +
b , then taking the final result modulo m . Adding the value b  provides hash-
dependent randomization of the input, in a way that ensures that for
variable-length inputs the 0-length input does not have a fixed hash value.
Adding the value 2 t  to a  ensures that the hash function acts dif ferently for
Page number: 374
inputs of dif ferent lengths. (W e use 2 t  rather than t  to ensure that the key a
+ 2 t  is odd if a  is odd.) W e call this hash function “wee” because it uses a
tiny amount of memory—more precisely , it can be implemented ef ficiently
using only the computer ’ s fast registers. (This hash function does not have a
name in the literature; it is a variant we developed for this textbook.)
Speed of the wee hash function
It is surprising how much ef ficiency can be bought with locality .
Experiments (unpublished, by the authors) suggest that evaluating the wee
hash function takes less time than probing a single  randomly chosen slot in
a hash table. These experiments were run on a laptop (2019 MacBook Pro)
with w  = 64 and a  = 123. For lar ge hash tables, evaluating the wee hash
function was 2 to 10 times faster than performing a single probe of the hash
table.
The wee hash function for variable-length inputs
Sometimes inputs are long—more than one w -bit word in length—or have
variable length, as discussed in Section 1 1.3.5 . W e can extend the wee hash
function, defined above for inputs that are at most single w -bit word in
length, to handle long or variable-length inputs. Here is one method for
doing so.
Suppose that an input k  has length t  (measured in bits). Break k  into a
sequence 〈 k1 , k2 , …, ku〉  of w -bit words, where u  = ⌈ t / w ⌉ , k1  contains the
least-significant w  bits of k , and ku  contains the most significant bits. If t  is
not a multiple of w , then ku  contains fewer than w  bits, in which case, pad
out the unused high-order bits of ku  with 0-bits. Define the function chop to
return a sequence of the w -bit words in k :
chop( k ) = 〈 k1 , k2 , …, ku〉 .
The most important property of the chop operation is that it is one-to-one,
given t : for any two t -bit keys k  and k ′, if k  ≠ k ′ then chop( k ) ≠ chop( k ′), and
k  can be derived from chop( k ) and t . The chop operation also has the useful
property that a single-word input key yields a single-word output sequence:
chop( k ) = 〈 k〉 .
Page number: 375
W ith the chop function in hand, we specify the wee hash function
ha , b , t , r ( k ) for an input k  of length t  bits as follows:
ha , b , t , r ( k ) = W EE ( k , a , b , t , r , m ),
where the procedure W EE  defined on the facing page iterates through the
elements of the w -bit words returned by chop( k ), applying 
  to the sum of
the current word ki  and the previously computed hash value so far , finally
returning the result obtained modulo m . This definition for variable-length
and long (multiple-word) inputs is a consistent extension of the definition in
equation (1 1.7) for short (single-word) inputs. For practical use, we
recommend that a  be a randomly chosen odd w -bit word, b  be a randomly
chosen w -bit word, and that r  = 4.
Note that the wee hash function is really a hash function family , with
individual hash functions determined by parameters a , b , t , r , and m . The
(approximate) 5-independence of the wee hash function family for variable-
length inputs can be ar gued based on the assumption that the 1-word wee
hash function is a random oracle and on the security of the cipher -block-
chaining message authentication code (CBC-MAC), as studied by Bellare et
al. [ 42 ]. The case here is actually simpler than that studied in the literature,
since if two messages have dif ferent lengths t  and t ′, then their “keys” are
dif ferent: a  + 2 t  ≠ a  + 2 t ′. W e omit the details.
W EE ( k , a , b , t , r , m )
1 u  = ⌈ t / w ⌉
2〈 k 1 , k 2 , …, k u〉  = chop( k )
3 q  = b
4 for  i  = 1 to  u
5
6 r eturn  q  mod m
This definition of a cryptographically inspired hash-function family is
meant to be realistic, yet only illustrative, and many variations and
improvements are possible. See the chapter notes for suggestions.
In summary , we see that when the memory system is hierarchical, it
becomes advantageous to use linear probing (a special case of double
hashing), since successive probes tend to stay in the same cache block.
Furthermore, hash functions that can be implemented using only the
Page number: 376
computer ’ s fast registers are exceptionally ef ficient, so they can be quite
complex and even cryptographically inspired, providing the high degree of
independence needed for linear probing to work most ef ficiently .
Exer cises
★  1 1.5-1
Complete the ar gument that for any odd positive integer a  and any integer r
≥ 0, the function 
  is one-to-one. Use a proof by contradiction and make
use of the fact that the function fa  works modulo 2w.
★  1 1.5-2
Ar gue that a random oracle is 5-independent.
★  1 1.5-3
Consider what happens to the value 
  as we flip a single bit ki  of the
input value k , for various values of r . Let 
  and 
 define the bit values ki  in the input (with k0  the least-
significant bit) and the bit values bj  in ga ( k ) = (2 k2 + ak ) mod 2w (where
ga ( k ) is the value that, when its halves are swapped, becomes fa ( k )).
Suppose that flipping a single bit ki  of the input k  may cause any bit bj  of
ga ( k ) to flip, for j  ≥ i . What is the least value of r  for which flipping the
value of any single bit ki  may cause any  bit of the output 
  to flip?
Explain.
Pr oblems
1 1-1     Longest-probe bound for hashing
Suppose you are using an open-addressed hash table of size m  to store n  ≤
m /2 items.
a.  Assuming independent uniform permutation hashing, show that for i  = 1,
2, …, n , the probability is at most 2− p that the i th insertion requires
strictly more than p  probes.
Page number: 377
b.  Show that for i  = 1, 2, …, n , the probability is O (1/ n2) that the i th
insertion requires more than 2 lg n  probes.
Let the random variable Xi  denote the number of probes required by the i th
insertion. Y ou have shown in part (b) that Pr{ Xi  > 2 lg n } = O (1/ n2). Let the
random variable X  = max { Xi  : 1 ≤ i  ≤ n } denote the maximum number of
probes required by any of the n  insertions.
c.  Show that Pr{ X  > 2 lg n } = O (1/ n ).
d.  Show that the expected length E[ X ] of the longest probe sequence is O (lg
n ).
1 1-2     Searching a static set
Y ou are asked to implement a searchable set of n  elements in which the
keys are numbers. The set is static (no I NSER T  or D ELETE  operations), and
the only operation required is S EARCH . Y ou are given an arbitrary amount of
time to preprocess the n  elements so that S EARCH  operations run quickly .
a.  Show how to implement S EARCH  in O (lg n ) worst-case time using no
extra storage beyond what is needed to store the elements of the set
themselves.
b.  Consider implementing the set by open-address hashing on m  slots, and
assume independent uniform permutation hashing. What is the minimum
amount of extra storage m  − n  required to make the average performance
of an unsuccessful S EARCH  operation be at least as good as the bound in
part (a)? Y our answer should be an asymptotic bound on m  − n  in terms of
n .
1 1-3     Slot-size bound for chaining
Given a hash table with n  slots, with collisions resolved by chaining,
suppose that n  keys are inserted into the table. Each key is equally likely to
be hashed to each slot. Let M  be the maximum number of keys in any slot
after all the keys have been inserted. Y our mission is to prove an O (lg n  / lg
lg n ) upper bound on E[ M ], the expected value of M .
a.  Ar gue that the probability Qk  that exactly k  keys hash to a particular slot
is given by
Page number: 378
b.  Let Pk  be the probability that M  = k , that is, the probability that the slot
containing the most keys contains k  keys. Show that Pk  ≤ nQk .
c.  Show that Qk  < ek/ kk. Hint:  Use Stirling’ s approximation, equation (3.25)
on page 67.
d.  Show that there exists a constant c  > 1 such that 
  for k0  = c  lg
n  / lg lg n . Conclude that Pk  < 1/ n2 for k  ≥ k0  = c  lg n  / lg lg n .
e.  Ar gue that
Conclude that E[ M ] = O (lg n  / lg lg n ).
1 1-4     Hashing and authentication
Let H  be a family of hash functions in which each hash function h  ∈  H
maps the universe U  of keys to {0, 1, …, m  − 1}.
a.  Show that if the family H  of hash functions is 2-independent, then it is
universal.
b.  Suppose that the universe U  is the set of n -tuples of values drawn from
ℤp  = {0, 1, …, p  − 1}, where p  is prime. Consider an element x  = 〈 x0 , x1 ,
…, xn −1〉  ∈  U . For any n -tuple a  = 〈 a0 , a1 , …, an −1〉  ∈  U , define the hash
function ha  by
Let H  = { ha  : a  ∈  U }. Show that H  is universal, but not 2-independent.
( Hint:  Find a key for which all hash functions in H  produce the same
value.)
Page number: 379
c.  Suppose that we modify H  slightly from part (b): for any a  ∈  U  and for
any b  ∈  ℤp , define
and 
 . Ar gue that H ′ is 2-independent. ( Hint:
Consider fixed n -tuples x  ∈  U  and y  ∈  U , with xi  ≠ yi  for some i . What
happens to 
  and 
  as ai  and b  range over ℤp ?)
d.  Alice and Bob secretly agree on a hash function h  from a 2-independent
family H  of hash functions. Each h  ∈  H  maps from a universe of keys
U  to ℤp , where p  is prime. Later , Alice sends a message m  to Bob over
the internet, where m  ∈  U . She authenticates this message to Bob by also
sending an authentication tag t  = h ( m ), and Bob checks that the pair ( m , t )
he receives indeed satisfies t  = h ( m ). Suppose that an adversary intercepts
( m , t ) en route and tries to fool Bob by replacing the pair ( m , t ) with a
dif ferent pair ( m ′, t ′). Ar gue that the probability that the adversary
succeeds in fooling Bob into accepting ( m ′, t ′) is at most 1/ p , no matter
how much computing power the adversary has, even if the adversary
knows the family H  of hash functions used.
Chapter notes
The books by Knuth [ 261 ] and Gonnet and Baeza-Y ates [ 193 ] are excellent
references for the analysis of hashing algorithms. Knuth credits H. P . Luhn
(1953) for inventing hash tables, along with the chaining method for
resolving collisions. At about the same time, G. M. Amdahl originated the
idea of open addressing. The notion of a random oracle was introduced by
Bellare et al. [ 43 ]. Carter and W egman [ 80 ] introduced the notion of
universal families of hash functions in 1979.
Dietzfelbinger et al. [ 1 13 ] invented the multiply-shift hash function and
gave a proof of Theorem 1 1.5. Thorup [ 437 ] provides extensions and
additional analysis. Thorup [ 438 ] gives a simple proof that linear probing
with 5-independent hashing takes constant expected time per operation.
Page number: 380
Thorup also describes the method for deletion in a hash table using linear
probing.
Fredman, Komlós, and Szemerédi [ 154 ] developed a perfect hashing
scheme for static sets—“perfect” because all collisions are avoided. An
extension of their method to dynamic sets, handling insertions and deletions
in amortized expected time O (1), has been given by Dietzfelbinger et al.
[ 1 14 ].
The wee hash function is based on the RC6 encryption algorithm [ 379 ].
Leiserson et al. [ 292 ] propose an “RC6 MIX ” function that is essentially the
same as the wee hash function. They give experimental evidence that it has
good randomness, and they also give a “D OT M IX ” function for dealing with
variable-length inputs. Bellare et al. [ 42 ] provide an analysis of the security
of the cipher -block-chaining message authentication code. This analysis
implies that the wee hash function has the desired pseudorandomness
properties.
1 The definition of “average-case” requires care—are we assuming an input distribution over the
keys, or are we randomizing the choice of hash function itself? W e’ll consider both approaches, but
with an emphasis on the use of a randomly chosen hash function.
2 In the literature, a ( c / m )-universal hash function is sometimes called c -universal or c -approximately
universal. W e’ll stick with the notation ( c / m )-universal.
Page number: 381
12        Binary Sear ch T r ees
The search tree data structure supports each of the dynamic-set operations
listed on page 250: S EARCH , M INIMUM , M AXIMUM , P REDECESSOR ,
S UCCESSOR , I NSER T , and D ELETE . Thus, you can use a search tree both as a
dictionary and as a priority queue.
Basic operations on a binary search tree take time proportional to the
height of the tree. For a complete binary tree with n  nodes, such operations
run in Θ(lg n ) worst-case time. If the tree is a linear chain of n  nodes,
however , the same operations take Θ( n ) worst-case time. In Chapter 13 ,
we’ll see a variation of binary search trees, red-black trees, whose
operations guarantee a height of O (lg n ). W e won’ t prove it here, but if you
build a binary search tree on a random set of n  keys, its expected height is
O (lg n ) even if you don’ t try to limit its height.
After presenting the basic properties of binary search trees, the
following sections show how to walk a binary search tree to print its values
in sorted order , how to search for a value in a binary search tree, how to
find the minimum or maximum element, how to find the predecessor or
successor of an element, and how to insert into or delete from a binary
search tree. The basic mathematical properties of trees appear in Appendix
B .
12.1    What is a binary sear ch tr ee?
A binary search tree is or ganized, as the name suggests, in a binary tree, as
shown in Figure 12.1 . Y ou can represent such a tree with a linked data
structure, as in Section 10.3 . In addition to a key  and satellite data, each
node object contains attributes left , right , and p  that point to the nodes
Page number: 382
corresponding to its left child, its right child, and its parent, respectively . If
a child or the parent is missing, the appropriate attribute contains the value
NIL . The tree itself has an attribute r oot  that points to the root node, or NIL  if
the tree is empty . The root node T .r oot  is the only node in a tree T  whose
parent is NIL .
Figur e 12.1  Binary search trees. For any node x , the keys in the left subtree of x  are at most x.key ,
and the keys in the right subtree of x  are at least x.key . Dif ferent binary search trees can represent the
same set of values. The worst-case running time for most search-tree operations is proportional to the
height of the tree. (a)  A binary search tree on 6 nodes with height 2. The top figure shows how to
view the tree conceptually , and the bottom figure shows the left , right , and p  attributes in each node,
in the style of Figure 10.6  on page 266. (b)  A less ef ficient binary search tree, with height 4, that
contains the same keys.
Page number: 383
The keys in a binary search tree are always stored in such a way as to
satisfy the binary-search-tree property :
Let x  be a node in a binary search tree. If y  is a node in the left
subtree of x , then y .key  ≤ x.key . If y  is a node in the right subtree of
x , then y .key  ≥ x.key .
Thus, in Figure 12.1(a) , the key of the root is 6, the keys 2, 5, and 5 in
its left subtree are no lar ger than 6, and the keys 7 and 8 in its right subtree
are no smaller than 6. The same property holds for every node in the tree.
For example, looking at the root’ s left child as the root of a subtree, this
subtree root has the key 5, the key 2 in its left subtree is no lar ger than 5,
and the key 5 in its right subtree is no smaller than 5.
Because of the binary-search-tree property , you can print out all the keys
in a binary search tree in sorted order by a simple recursive algorithm,
called an inorder tree walk , given by the procedure I NORDER -T REE -W ALK .
This algorithm is so named because it prints the key of the root of a subtree
between printing the values in its left subtree and printing those in its right
subtree. (Similarly , a preorder tree walk  prints the root before the values in
either subtree, and a postorder tree walk  prints the root after the values in
its subtrees.) T o print all the elements in a binary search tree T , call
I NORDER -T REE -W ALK ( T .r oot ). For example, the inorder tree walk prints the
keys in each of the two binary search trees from Figure 12.1  in the order 2,
5, 5, 6, 7, 8. The correctness of the algorithm follows by induction directly
from the binary-search-tree property .
I NORDER -T REE -W ALK ( x )
1 if  x  ≠ NIL
2 I NORDER -T REE -W ALK ( x.left )
3 print x.key
4 I NORDER -T REE -W ALK ( x.right )
It takes Θ( n ) time to walk an n -node binary search tree, since after the
initial call, the procedure calls itself recursively exactly twice for each node
in the tree—once for its left child and once for its right child. The following
theorem gives a formal proof that it takes linear time to perform an inorder
tree walk.
Page number: 384
Theorem 12.1
If x  is the root of an n -node subtree, then the call I NORDER -T REE -W ALK ( x )
takes Θ( n ) time.
Proof    Let T ( n ) denote the time taken by I NORDER -T REE -W ALK  when it is
called on the root of an n -node subtree. Since I NORDER -T REE -W ALK  visits
all n  nodes of the subtree, we have T ( n ) = Ω( n ). It remains to show that T ( n )
= O ( n ).
Since I NORDER -T REE -W ALK  takes a small, constant amount of time on an
empty subtree (for the test x  ≠ NIL ), we have T (0) = c  for some constant c  >
0.
For n  > 0, suppose that I NORDER -T REE -W ALK  is called on a node x
whose left subtree has k  nodes and whose right subtree has n  − k  − 1 nodes.
The time to perform I NORDER -T REE -W ALK ( x ) is bounded by T ( n ) ≤ T ( k ) +
T ( n  − k  − 1) + d  for some constant d  > 0 that reflects an upper bound on the
time to execute the body of I NORDER -T REE -W ALK ( x ), exclusive of the time
spent in recursive calls.
W e use the substitution method to show that T ( n ) = O ( n ) by proving that
T ( n ) ≤ ( c  + d ) n  + c . For n  = 0, we have ( c  + d ) · 0 + c  = c  = T (0). For n  > 0,
we have
T ( n ) ≤ T ( k ) + T ( n  − k  − 1) + d
≤ (( c  + d ) k  + c ) + (( c  + d )( n  − k  − 1) + c ) + d
= ( c  + d ) n  + c  − ( c  + d ) + c  + d
= ( c  + d ) n  + c ,
which completes the proof.
▪
Exer cises
12.1-1
For the set {1, 4, 5, 10, 16, 17, 21} of keys, draw binary search trees of
heights 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6.
12.1-2
What is the dif ference between the binary-search-tree property and the min-
heap property on page 163? Can the min-heap property be used to print out
Page number: 385
the keys of an n -node tree in sorted order in O ( n ) time? Show how , or
explain why not.
12.1-3
Give a nonrecursive algorithm that performs an inorder tree walk. ( Hint:  An
easy solution uses a stack as an auxiliary data structure. A more
complicated, but elegant, solution uses no stack but assumes that you can
test two pointers for equality .)
12.1-4
Give recursive algorithms that perform preorder and postorder tree walks in
Θ( n ) time on a tree of n  nodes.
12.1-5
Ar gue that since sorting n  elements takes Ω( n  lg n ) time in the worst case in
the comparison model, any comparison-based algorithm for constructing a
binary search tree from an arbitrary list of n  elements takes Ω( n  lg n ) time
in the worst case.
12.2    Querying a binary sear ch tr ee
Binary search trees can support the queries M INIMUM , M AXIMUM ,
S UCCESSOR , and P REDECESSOR , as well as S EARCH . This section examines
these operations and shows how to support each one in O ( h ) time on any
binary search tree of height h .
Sear ching
T o search for a node with a given key in a binary search tree, call the T REE -
S EARCH  procedure. Given a pointer x  to the root of a subtree and a key k ,
T REE -S EARCH ( x , k ) returns a pointer to a node with key k  if one exists in the
subtree; otherwise, it returns NIL . T o search for key k  in the entire binary
search tree T , call T REE -S EARCH ( T .r oot , k ).
T REE -S EARCH ( x , k )
1 if  x  == NIL  or k  == x.key
2 r eturn  x
3 if  k  < x.key
4 r eturn  T REE -S EARCH ( x.left , k )
Page number: 386
5 else r eturn  T REE -S EARCH ( x.right , k )
I TERA TIVE -T REE -S EARCH ( x , k )
1 while  x  ≠ NIL  and k  ≠ x.key
2 if  k  < x.key
3 x  = x.left
4 else  x  = x.right
5 r eturn  x
The T REE -S EARCH  procedure begins its search at the root and traces a
simple path downward in the tree, as shown in Figure 12.2(a) . For each
node x  it encounters, it compares the key k  with x.key . If the two keys are
equal, the search terminates. If k  is smaller than x.key , the search continues
in the left subtree of x , since the binary-search-tree property implies that k
cannot reside in the right subtree. Symmetrically , if k  is lar ger than x.key ,
the search continues in the right subtree. The nodes encountered during the
recursion form a simple path downward from the root of the tree, and thus
the running time of T REE -S EARCH  is O ( h ), where h  is the height of the tree.
Page number: 387
Figur e 12.2  Queries on a binary search tree. Nodes and paths followed in each query are colored
blue. (a)  A search for the key 13 in the tree follows the path 15 → 6 → 7 → 13 from the root. (b)
The minimum key in the tree is 2, which is found by following left  pointers from the root. The
maximum key 20 is found by following right  pointers from the root. (c)  The successor of the node
with key 15 is the node with key 17, since it is the minimum key in the right subtree of 15. (d)  The
node with key 13 has no right subtree, and thus its successor is its lowest ancestor whose left child is
also an ancestor . In this case, the node with key 15 is its successor .
Since the T REE -S EARCH  procedure recurses on either the left subtree or
the right subtree, but not both, we can rewrite the algorithm to “unroll” the
recursion into a while  loop. On most computers, the I TERA TIVE -T REE -
S EARCH  procedure on the facing page is more ef ficient.
Minimum and maximum
T o find an element in a binary search tree whose key is a minimum, just
follow left  child pointers from the root until you encounter a NIL , as shown
Page number: 388
in Figure 12.2(b) . The T REE -M INIMUM  procedure returns a pointer to the
minimum element in the subtree rooted at a given node x , which we assume
to be non- NIL .
T REE -M INIMUM ( x )
1 while  x.left  ≠ NIL
2 x  = x.left
3 r eturn  x
T REE -M AXIMUM ( x )
1 while  x.right  ≠ NIL
2 x  = x.right
3 r eturn  x
The binary-search-tree property guarantees that T REE -M INIMUM  is
correct. If node x  has no left subtree, then since every key in the right
subtree of x  is at least as lar ge as x.key , the minimum key in the subtree
rooted at x  is x.key . If node x  has a left subtree, then since no key in the
right subtree is smaller than x.key  and every key in the left subtree is not
lar ger than x.key , the minimum key in the subtree rooted at x  resides in the
subtree rooted at x.left .
The pseudocode for T REE -M AXIMUM  is symmetric. Both T REE -M INIMUM
and T REE -M AXIMUM  run in O ( h ) time on a tree of height h  since, as in T REE -
S EARCH , the sequence of nodes encountered forms a simple path downward
from the root.
Successor and pr edecessor
Given a node in a binary search tree, how can you find its successor in the
sorted order determined by an inorder tree walk? If all keys are distinct, the
successor of a node x  is the node with the smallest key greater than x.key .
Regardless of whether the keys are distinct, we define the successor  of a
node as the next node visited in an inorder tree walk. The structure of a
binary search tree allows you to determine the successor of a node without
comparing keys. The T REE -S UCCESSOR  procedure on the facing page returns
the successor of a node x  in a binary search tree if it exists, or NIL  if x  is the
last node that would be visited during an inorder walk.
The code for T REE -S UCCESSOR  has two cases. If the right subtree of node
x  is nonempty , then the successor of x  is just the leftmost node in x ’ s right
Page number: 389
subtree, which line 2 finds by calling T REE -M INIMUM ( x.right ). For example,
the successor of the node with key 15 in Figure 12.2(c)  is the node with key
17.
On the other hand, as Exercise 12.2-6 asks you to show , if the right
subtree of node x  is empty and x  has a successor y , then y  is the lowest
ancestor of x  whose left child is also an ancestor of x . In Figure 12.2(d) , the
successor of the node with key 13 is the node with key 15. T o find y , go up
the tree from x  until you encounter either the root or a node that is the left
child of its parent. Lines 4–8 of T REE -S UCCESSOR  handle this case.
T REE -S UCCESSOR ( x )
1 if  x.right  ≠ NIL
2 r eturn  T REE -M INIMUM ( x.right )  //  leftmost node in right subtree
3 else  //  find the lowest ancestor of x  whose left child is an ancestor of x
4 y  = x.p
5 while  y  ≠ NIL  and x  == y .right
6 x  = y
7 y  = y .p
8 r eturn  y
The running time of T REE -S UCCESSOR  on a tree of height h  is O ( h ), since
it either follows a simple path up the tree or follows a simple path down the
tree. The procedure T REE -P REDECESSOR , which is symmetric to T REE -
S UCCESSOR , also runs in O ( h ) time.
In summary , we have proved the following theorem.
Theorem 12.2
The dynamic-set operations S EARCH , M INIMUM , M AXIMUM , S UCCESSOR , and
P REDECESSOR  can be implemented so that each one runs in O ( h ) time on a
binary search tree of height h .
▪
Exer cises
12.2-1
Y ou are searching for the number 363 in a binary search tree containing
numbers between 1 and 1000. Which of the following sequences cannot  be
the sequence of nodes examined?
a.  2, 252, 401, 398, 330, 344, 397, 363.
Page number: 390
b.  924, 220, 91 1, 244, 898, 258, 362, 363.
c.  925, 202, 91 1, 240, 912, 245, 363.
d.  2, 399, 387, 219, 266, 382, 381, 278, 363.
e.  935, 278, 347, 621, 299, 392, 358, 363.
12.2-2
W rite recursive versions of T REE -M INIMUM  and T REE -M AXIMUM .
12.2-3
W rite the T REE -P REDECESSOR  procedure.
12.2-4
Professor Kilmer claims to have discovered a remarkable property of binary
search trees. Suppose that the search for key k  in a binary search tree ends
up at a leaf. Consider three sets: A , the keys to the left of the search path; B ,
the keys on the search path; and C , the keys to the right of the search path.
Professor Kilmer claims that any three keys a  ∈  A , b  ∈  B , and c  ∈  C  must
satisfy a  ≤ b  ≤ c . Give a smallest possible counterexample to the professor ’ s
claim.
12.2-5
Show that if a node in a binary search tree has two children, then its
successor has no left child and its predecessor has no right child.
12.2-6
Consider a binary search tree T  whose keys are distinct. Show that if the
right subtree of a node x  in T  is empty and x  has a successor y , then y  is the
lowest ancestor of x  whose left child is also an ancestor of x . (Recall that
every node is its own ancestor .)
12.2-7
An alternative method of performing an inorder tree walk of an n -node
binary search tree finds the minimum element in the tree by calling T REE -
M INIMUM  and then making n  − 1 calls to T REE -S UCCESSOR . Prove that this
algorithm runs in Θ( n ) time.
12.2-8
Page number: 391
Prove that no matter what node you start at in a height- h  binary search tree,
k  successive calls to T REE -S UCCESSOR  take O ( k  + h ) time.
12.2-9
Let T  be a binary search tree whose keys are distinct, let x  be a leaf node,
and let y  be its parent. Show that y .key  is either the smallest key in T  lar ger
than x.key  or the lar gest key in T  smaller than x.key .
12.3    Insertion and deletion
The operations of insertion and deletion cause the dynamic set represented
by a binary search tree to change. The data structure must be modified to
reflect this change, but in such a way that the binary-search-tree property
continues to hold. W e’ll see that modifying the tree to insert a new element
is relatively straightforward, but deleting a node from a binary search tree is
more complicated.
Insertion
The T REE -I NSER T  procedure inserts a new node into a binary search tree.
The procedure takes a binary search tree T  and a node z  for which z.key  has
already been filled in, z.left  = NIL , and z.right  = NIL . It modifies T  and some
of the attributes of z  so as to insert z  into an appropriate position in the tree.
T REE -I NSER T ( T , z )
  1 x  = T .r oot //  node being compared with z
  2 y  = NIL //  y  will be parent of z
  3 while  x  ≠ NIL //  descend until reaching a leaf
  4 y  = x
  5 if  z.key  < x.key
  6 x  = x.left
  7 else  x  = x.right
  8 z.p  = y //  found the location—insert z  with parent y
  9 if  y  == NIL
10 T .r oot  = z //  tree T  was empty
1 1 elseif  z.key  < y .key
12 y .left  = z
13 else  y .right  = z
Page number: 392
Figure 12.3  shows how T REE -I NSER T  works. Just like the procedures
T REE -S EARCH  and I TERA TIVE -T REE -S EARCH , T REE -I NSER T  begins at the root
of the tree and the pointer x  traces a simple path downward looking for a
NIL  to replace with the input node z . The procedure maintains the trailing
pointer  y  as the parent of x . After initialization, the while  loop in lines 3–7
causes these two pointers to move down the tree, going left or right
depending on the comparison of z.key  with x.key , until x  becomes NIL . This
NIL  occupies the position where node z  will go. More precisely , this NIL  is a
left  or right  attribute of the node that will become z ’ s parent, or it is T .r oot  if
tree T  is currently empty . The procedure needs the trailing pointer y ,
because by the time it finds the NIL  where z  belongs, the search has
proceeded one step beyond the node that needs to be changed. Lines 8–13
set the pointers that cause z  to be inserted.
Figur e 12.3  Inserting a node with key 13 into a binary search tree. The simple path from the root
down to the position where the node is inserted is shown in blue. The new node and the link to its
parent are highlighted in orange.
Like the other primitive operations on search trees, the procedure T REE -
I NSER T  runs in O ( h ) time on a tree of height h .
Deletion
The overall strategy for deleting a node z  from a binary search tree T  has
three basic cases and, as we’ll see, one of the cases is a bit tricky .
If z  has no children, then simply remove it by modifying its parent to
replace z  with NIL  as its child.
If z  has just one child, then elevate that child to take z ’ s position in
the tree by modifying z ’ s parent to replace z  by z ’ s child.
Page number: 393
If z  has two children, find z ’ s successor y —which must belong to z ’ s
right subtree—and move y  to take z ’ s position in the tree. The rest of
z ’ s original right subtree becomes y ’ s new right subtree, and z ’ s left
subtree becomes y ’ s new left subtree. Because y  is z ’ s successor , it
cannot have a left child, and y ’ s original right child moves into y ’ s
original position, with the rest of y ’ s original right subtree following
automatically . This case is the tricky one because, as we’ll see, it
matters whether y  is z ’ s right child.
The procedure for deleting a given node z  from a binary search tree T
takes as ar guments pointers to T  and z . It or ganizes its cases a bit dif ferently
from the three cases outlined previously by considering the four cases
shown in Figure 12.4 .
Page number: 394
Figur e 12.4  Deleting a node z , in blue, from a binary search tree. Node z  may be the root, a left child
of node q , or a right child of q . The node that will replace node z  in its position in the tree is colored
orange. (a)  Node z  has no left child. Replace z  by its right child r , which may or may not be NIL . (b)
Node z  has a left child l  but no right child. Replace z  by l . (c)  Node z  has two children. Its left child is
node l , its right child is its successor y  (which has no left child), and y ’ s right child is node x . Replace
z  by y , updating y ’ s left child to become l , but leaving x  as y ’ s right child. (d)  Node z  has two children
(left child l  and right child r ), and its successor y  ≠ r  lies within the subtree rooted at r . First replace y
by its own right child x , and set y  to be r ’ s parent. Then set y  to be q ’ s child and the parent of l .
Page number: 395
If z  has no left child, then as in part (a) of the figure, replace z  by its
right child, which may or may not be NIL . When z ’ s right child is NIL ,
this case deals with the situation in which z  has no children. When z ’ s
right child is non- NIL , this case handles the situation in which z  has
just one child, which is its right child.
Otherwise, if z  has just one child, then that child is a left child. As in
part (b) of the figure, replace z  by its left child.
Otherwise, z  has both a left and a right child. Find z ’ s successor y ,
which lies in z ’ s right subtree and has no left child (see Exercise 12.2-
5). Splice node y  out of its current location and replace z  by y  in the
tree. How to do so depends on whether y  is z ’ s right child:
If y  is z ’ s right child, then as in part (c) of the figure, replace z
by y , leaving y ’ s right child alone.
Otherwise, y  lies within z ’ s right subtree but is not z ’ s right
child. In this case, as in part (d) of the figure, first replace y  by
its own right child, and then replace z  by y .
As part of the process of deleting a node, subtrees need to move around
within the binary search tree. The subroutine T RANSPLANT  replaces one
subtree as a child of its parent with another subtree. When T RANSPLANT
replaces the subtree rooted at node u  with the subtree rooted at node v , node
u ’ s parent becomes node v ’ s parent, and u ’ s parent ends up having v  as its
appropriate child. T RANSPLANT  allows v  to be NIL  instead of a pointer to a
node.
T RANSPLANT ( T , u , v )
1 if  u.p  == NIL
2 T .r oot  = v
3 elseif  u  == u.p.left
4 u.p.left  = v
5 else  u.p.right  = v
6 if  v  ≠ NIL
7 v .p  = u.p
Here is how T RANSPLANT  works. Lines 1–2 handle the case in which u  is
the root of T . Otherwise, u  is either a left child or a right child of its parent.
Lines 3–4 take care of updating u.p.left  if u  is a left child, and line 5 updates
Page number: 396
u.p.right  if u  is a right child. Because v  may be NIL , lines 6–7 update v .p
only if v  is non- NIL . The procedure T RANSPLANT  does not attempt to update
v .left  and v .right . Doing so, or not doing so, is the responsibility of
T RANSPLANT ’ s caller .
The procedure T REE -D ELETE  on the facing page uses T RANSPLANT  to
delete node z  from binary search tree T . It executes the four cases as
follows. Lines 1–2 handle the case in which node z  has no left child ( Figure
12.4(a) ), and lines 3–4 handle the case in which z  has a left child but no
right child ( Figure 12.4(b) ). Lines 5–12 deal with the remaining two cases,
in which z  has two children. Line 5 finds node y , which is the successor of
z . Because z  has a nonempty right subtree, its successor must be the node in
that subtree with the smallest key; hence the call to T REE -M INIMUM ( z.right ).
As we noted before, y  has no left child. The procedure needs to splice y  out
of its current location and replace z  by y  in the tree. If y  is z ’ s right child
( Figure 12.4(c) ), then lines 10–12 replace z  as a child of its parent by y  and
replace y ’ s left child by z ’ s left child. Node y  retains its right child ( x  in
Figure 12.4(c) ), and so no change to y .right  needs to occur . If y  is not z ’ s
right child ( Figure 12.4(d) ), then two nodes have to move. Lines 7–9
replace y  as a child of its parent by y ’ s right child ( x  in Figure 12.4(c) ) and
make z ’ s right child ( r  in the figure) become y ’ s right child instead. Finally ,
lines 10–12 replace z  as a child of its parent by y  and replace y ’ s left child
by z ’ s left child.
T REE -D ELETE ( T , z )
  1 if  z.left  == NIL
  2 T RANSPLANT ( T , z , z.right ) //  replace z  by its right child
  3 elseif  z.right  == NIL
  4 T RANSPLANT ( T , z , z.left ) //  replace z  by its left child
  5 else  y  = T REE -M INIMUM ( z.right ) //  y  is z ’ s successor
  6 if  y  ≠ z.right //  is y  farther down the tree?
  7 T RANSPLANT ( T , y , y .right ) //  replace y  by its right child
  8 y .right  = z.right //  z ’ s right child becomes
  9 y .right.p  = y //       y ’ s right child
10 T RANSPLANT ( T , z , y ) //  replace z  by its successor y
1 1 y .left  = z.left //  and give z ’ s left child to y ,
12 y .left.p  = y //       which had no left child
Each line of T REE -D ELETE , including the calls to T RANSPLANT , takes
constant time, except for the call to T REE -M INIMUM  in line 5. Thus, T REE -
D ELETE  runs in O ( h ) time on a tree of height h .
Page number: 397
In summary , we have proved the following theorem.
Theorem 12.3
The dynamic-set operations I NSER T  and D ELETE  can be implemented so that
each one runs in O ( h ) time on a binary search tree of height h .
▪
Exer cises
12.3-1
Give a recursive version of the T REE -I NSER T  procedure.
12.3-2
Suppose that you construct a binary search tree by repeatedly inserting
distinct values into the tree. Ar gue that the number of nodes examined in
searching for a value in the tree is 1 plus the number of nodes examined
when the value was first inserted into the tree.
12.3-3
Y ou can sort a given set of n  numbers by first building a binary search tree
containing these numbers (using T REE -I NSER T  repeatedly to insert the
numbers one by one) and then printing the numbers by an inorder tree walk.
What are the worst-case and best-case running times for this sorting
algorithm?
12.3-4
When T REE -D ELETE  calls T RANSPLANT , under what circumstances can the
parameter v  of T RANSPLANT  be NIL ?
12.3-5
Is the operation of deletion “commutative” in the sense that deleting x  and
then y  from a binary search tree leaves the same tree as deleting y  and then
x ? Ar gue why it is or give a counterexample.
12.3-6
Suppose that instead of each node x  keeping the attribute x.p , pointing to x ’ s
parent, it keeps x.succ , pointing to x ’ s successor . Give pseudocode for T REE -
S EARCH , T REE -I NSER T , and T REE -D ELETE  on a binary search tree T  using this
representation. These procedures should operate in O ( h ) time, where h  is
Page number: 398
the height of the tree T . Y ou may assume that all keys in the binary search
tree are distinct. ( Hint:  Y ou might wish to implement a subroutine that
returns the parent of a node.)
12.3-7
When node z  in T REE -D ELETE  has two children, you can choose node y  to be
its predecessor rather than its successor . What other changes to T REE -
D ELETE  are necessary if you do so? Some have ar gued that a fair strategy ,
giving equal priority to predecessor and successor , yields better empirical
performance. How might T REE -D ELETE  be minimally changed to implement
such a fair strategy?
Pr oblems
12-1     Binary search trees with equal keys
Equal keys pose a problem for the implementation of binary search trees.
a.  What is the asymptotic performance of T REE -I NSER T  when used to insert
n  items with identical keys into an initially empty binary search tree?
Consider changing T REE -I NSER T  to test whether z.key  = x.key  before line 5
and to test whether z.key  = y .key  before line 1 1. If equality holds, implement
one of the following strategies. For each strategy , find the asymptotic
performance of inserting n  items with identical keys into an initially empty
binary search tree. (The strategies are described for line 5, which compares
the keys of z  and x . Substitute y  for x  to arrive at the strategies for line 1 1.)
b.  Keep a boolean flag x.b  at node x , and set x  to either x.left  or x.right
based on the value of x.b , which alternates between F ALSE  and TRUE  each
time T REE -I NSER T  visits x  while inserting a node with the same key as x .
c.  Keep a list of nodes with equal keys at x , and insert z  into the list.
d.  Randomly set x  to either x.left  or x.right . (Give the worst-case
performance and informally derive the expected running time.)
12-2     Radix trees
Given two strings a  = a0 a1  … ap  and b  = b0 b1  … bq , where each ai  and each
bj  belongs to some ordered set of characters, we say that string a  is
Page number: 399
lexicographically less than  string b  if either
1 . there exists an integer j , where 0 ≤ j  ≤ min { p , q }, such that ai  = bi
for all i  = 0, 1, …, j  − 1 and aj  < bj , or
2 . p  < q  and ai  = bi  for all i  = 0, 1, …, p .
For example, if a  and b  are bit strings, then 10100 < 101 10 by rule 1 (letting
j  = 3) and 10100 < 101000 by rule 2. This ordering is similar to that used in
English-language dictionaries.
The radix tree  data structure shown in Figure 12.5  (also known as a trie )
stores the bit strings 101 1, 10, 01 1, 100, and 0. When searching for a key a
= a0 a1  … ap , go left at a node of depth i  if ai  = 0 and right if ai  = 1. Let S  be
a set of distinct bit strings whose lengths sum to n . Show how to use a radix
tree to sort S  lexicographically in Θ( n ) time. For the example in Figure
12.5 , the output of the sort should be the sequence 0, 01 1, 10, 100, 101 1.
Figur e 12.5  A radix tree storing the bit strings 101 1, 10, 01 1, 100, and 0. T o determine each node’ s
key , traverse the simple path from the root to that node. There is no need, therefore, to store the keys
in the nodes. The keys appear here for illustrative purposes only . Keys corresponding to blue nodes
are not in the tree. Such nodes are present only to establish a path to other nodes.
12-3     A verage node depth in a randomly built binary search tree
A randomly built binary search tree  on n  keys is a binary search tree
created by starting with an empty tree and inserting the keys in random
order , where each of the n ! permutations of the keys is equally likely . In this
problem, you will prove that the average depth of a node in a randomly
built binary search tree with n  nodes is O (lg n ). The technique reveals a
Page number: 400
surprising similarity between the building of a binary search tree and the
execution of R ANDOMIZED -Q UICKSOR T  from Section 7.3 .
Denote the depth of any node x  in tree T  by d ( x , T ). Then the total path
length  P ( T ) of a tree T  is the sum, over all nodes x  in T , of d ( x , T ).
a.  Ar gue that the average depth of a node in T  is
Thus, you need to show that the expected value of P ( T ) is O ( n  lg n ).
b.  Let TL  and TR  denote the left and right subtrees of tree T , respectively .
Ar gue that if T  has n  nodes, then
P ( T ) = P ( TL ) + P ( TR ) + n  − 1.
c.  Let P ( n ) denote the average total path length of a randomly built binary
search tree with n  nodes. Show that
d.  Show how to rewrite P ( n ) as
e.  Recalling the alternative analysis of the randomized version of quicksort
given in Problem 7-3, conclude that P ( n ) = O ( n  lg n ).
Each recursive invocation of randomized quicksort chooses a random pivot
element to partition the set of elements being sorted. Each node of a binary
search tree partitions the set of elements that fall into the subtree rooted at
that node.
f.  Describe an implementation of quicksort in which the comparisons to sort
a set of elements are exactly the same as the comparisons to insert the
elements into a binary search tree. (The order in which comparisons are
made may dif fer , but the same comparisons must occur .)
12-4     Number of dif ferent binary trees
Page number: 401
Let bn  denote the number of dif ferent binary trees with n  nodes. In this
problem, you will find a formula for bn , as well as an asymptotic estimate.
a.  Show that b0  = 1 and that, for n  ≥ 1,
b.  Referring to Problem 4-5 on page 121 for the definition of a generating
function, let B ( x ) be the generating function
Show that B ( x ) = xB ( x )2 + 1, and hence one way to express B ( x ) in closed
form is
The T aylor expansion  of f ( x ) around the point x  = a  is given by
where f( k )( x ) is the k th derivative of f  evaluated at x .
c.  Show that
(the n th Catalan number ) by using the T aylor expansion of 
around x  = 0. (If you wish, instead of using the T aylor expansion, you
may use the generalization of the binomial theorem, equation (C.4) on
page 1 181, to noninteger exponents n , where for any real number n  and
for any integer k , you can interpret 
  to be n ( n  − 1) … ( n  − k  + 1)/ k ! if k
≥ 0, and 0 otherwise.)
d.  Show that
Page number: 402
Chapter notes
Knuth [ 261 ] contains a good discussion of simple binary search trees as
well as many variations. Binary search trees seem to have been
independently discovered by a number of people in the late 1950s. Radix
trees are often called “tries,” which comes from the middle letters in the
word r etrieval . Knuth [ 261 ] also discusses them.
Many texts, including the first two editions of this book, describe a
somewhat simpler method of deleting a node from a binary search tree
when both of its children are present. Instead of replacing node z  by its
successor y , delete node y  but copy its key and satellite data into node z .
The downside of this approach is that the node actually deleted might not be
the node passed to the delete procedure. If other components of a program
maintain pointers to nodes in the tree, they could mistakenly end up with
“stale” pointers to nodes that have been deleted. Although the deletion
method presented in this edition of this book is a bit more complicated, it
guarantees that a call to delete node z  deletes node z  and only node z .
Section 14.5  will show how to construct an optimal binary search tree
when you know the search frequencies before constructing the tree. That is,
given the frequencies of searching for each key and the frequencies of
searching for values that fall between keys in the tree, a set of searches in
the constructed binary search tree examines the minimum number of nodes.
Page number: 403
13        Red-Black T r ees
Chapter 12  showed that a binary search tree of height h  can support any of
the basic dynamic-set operations—such as S EARCH , P REDECESSOR ,
S UCCESSOR , M INIMUM , M AXIMUM , I NSER T , and D ELETE —in O ( h ) time. Thus,
the set operations are fast if the height of the search tree is small. If its
height is lar ge, however , the set operations may run no faster than with a
linked list. Red-black trees are one of many search-tree schemes that are
“balanced” in order to guarantee that basic dynamic-set operations take O (lg
n ) time in the worst case.
13.1    Pr operties of r ed-black tr ees
A red-black tree  is a binary search tree with one extra bit of storage per
node: its color , which can be either RED  or BLACK . By constraining the node
colors on any simple path from the root to a leaf, red-black trees ensure that
no such path is more than twice as long as any other , so that the tree is
approximately balanced . Indeed, as we’re about to see, the height of a red-
black tree with n  keys is at most 2 lg( n  + 1), which is O (lg n ).
Each node of the tree now contains the attributes color , key , left , right ,
and p . If a child or the parent of a node does not exist, the corresponding
pointer attribute of the node contains the value NIL . Think of these NIL s as
pointers to leaves (external nodes) of the binary search tree and the normal,
key-bearing nodes as internal nodes of the tree.
A red-black tree is a binary search tree that satisfies the following red-
black properties :
1 . Every node is either red or black.
Page number: 404
2 . The root is black.
3 . Every leaf ( NIL ) is black.
4 . If a node is red, then both its children are black.
5 . For each node, all simple paths from the node to descendant leaves
contain the same number of black nodes.
Figure 13.1(a)  shows an example of a red-black tree.
As a matter of convenience in dealing with boundary conditions in red-
black tree code, we use a single sentinel to represent NIL  (see page 262). For
a red-black tree T , the sentinel T .nil  is an object with the same attributes as
an ordinary node in the tree. Its color  attribute is BLACK , and its other
attributes— p , left , right , and key —can take on arbitrary values. As Figure
13.1(b)  shows, all pointers to NIL  are replaced by pointers to the sentinel
T .nil .
Why use the sentinel? The sentinel makes it possible to treat a NIL  child
of a node x  as an ordinary node whose parent is x . An alternative design
would use a distinct sentinel node for each NIL  in the tree, so that the parent
of each NIL  is well defined. That approach needlessly wastes space,
however . Instead, just the one sentinel T .nil  represents all the NIL s—all
leaves and the root’ s parent. The values of the attributes p , left , right , and
key  of the sentinel are immaterial. The red-black tree procedures can place
whatever values in the sentinel that yield simpler code.
W e generally confine our interest to the internal nodes of a red-black
tree, since they hold the key values. The remainder of this chapter omits the
leaves in drawings of red-black trees, as shown in Figure 13.1(c) .
W e call the number of black nodes on any simple path from, but not
including, a node x  down to a leaf the black-height  of the node, denoted
bh( x ). By property 5, the notion of black-height is well defined, since all
descending simple paths from the node have the same number of black
nodes. The black-height of a red-black tree is the black-height of its root.
The following lemma shows why red-black trees make good search
trees.
Lemma 13.1
A red-black tree with n  internal nodes has height at most 2 lg( n  + 1).
Page number: 405
Proof    W e start by showing that the subtree rooted at any node x  contains at
least 2bh( x ) − 1 internal nodes. W e prove this claim by induction on the
height of x . If the height of x  is 0, then x  must be a leaf ( T .nil ), and the
subtree rooted at x  indeed contains at least 2bh( x ) − 1 = 20 − 1 = 0 internal
nodes. For the inductive step, consider a node x  that has positive height and
is an internal node. Then node x  has two children, either or both of which
may be a leaf. If a child is black, then it contributes 1 to x ’ s black-height but
not to its own. If a child is red, then it contributes to neither x ’ s black-height
nor its own. Therefore, each child has a black-height of either bh( x ) − 1 (if
it’ s black) or bh( x ) (if it’ s red). Since the height of a child of x  is less than
the height of x  itself, we can apply the inductive hypothesis to conclude that
each child has at least 2bh( x )−1 − 1 internal nodes. Thus, the subtree rooted at
x  contains at least (2bh( x )−1 − 1) + (2bh( x )−1 − 1) + 1 = 2bh( x ) − 1 internal
nodes, which proves the claim.
Page number: 406
Figur e 13.1  A red-black tree. Every node in a red-black tree is either red or black, the children of a
red node are both black, and every simple path from a node to a descendant leaf contains the same
number of black nodes. (a)  Every leaf, shown as a NIL , is black. Each non- NIL  node is marked with
its black-height, where NIL s have black-height 0. (b)  The same red-black tree but with each NIL
replaced by the single sentinel T .nil , which is always black, and with black-heights omitted. The root’ s
parent is also the sentinel. (c)  The same red-black tree but with leaves and the root’ s parent omitted
entirely . The remainder of this chapter uses this drawing style.
Page number: 407
T o complete the proof of the lemma, let h  be the height of the tree.
According to property 4, at least half the nodes on any simple path from the
root to a leaf, not including the root, must be black. Consequently , the black-
height of the root must be at least h /2, and thus,
n  ≥ 2h /2 − 1.
Moving the 1 to the left-hand side and taking logarithms on both sides
yields lg( n  + 1) ≥ h /2, or h  ≤ 2 lg( n  + 1).
▪
As an immediate consequence of this lemma, each of the dynamic-set
operations S EARCH , M INIMUM , M AXIMUM , S UCCESSOR , and P REDECESSOR
runs in O (lg n ) time on a red-black tree, since each can run in O ( h ) time on a
binary search tree of height h  (as shown in Chapter 12 ) and any red-black
tree on n  nodes is a binary search tree with height O (lg n ). (Of course,
references to NIL  in the algorithms of Chapter 12  have to be replaced by
T .nil .) Although the procedures T REE -I NSER T  and T REE -D ELETE  from Chapter
12  run in O (lg n ) time when given a red-black tree as input, you cannot just
use them to implement the dynamic-set operations I NSER T  and D ELETE . They
do not necessarily maintain the red-black properties, so you might not end
up with a legal red-black tree. The remainder of this chapter shows how to
insert into and delete from a red-black tree in O (lg n ) time.
Exer cises
13.1-1
In the style of Figure 13.1(a) , draw the complete binary search tree of height
3 on the keys {1, 2, …, 15}. Add the NIL  leaves and color the nodes in three
dif ferent ways such that the black-heights of the resulting red-black trees are
2, 3, and 4.
13.1-2
Draw the red-black tree that results after T REE -I NSER T  is called on the tree in
Figure 13.1  with key 36. If the inserted node is colored red, is the resulting
tree a red-black tree? What if it is colored black?
13.1-3
Define a relaxed red-black tree  as a binary search tree that satisfies red-
black properties 1, 3, 4, and 5, but whose root may be either red or black.
Page number: 408
Consider a relaxed red-black tree T  whose root is red. If the root of T  is
changed to black but no other changes occur , is the resulting tree a red-black
tree?
13.1-4
Suppose that every black node in a red-black tree “absorbs” all of its red
children, so that the children of any red node become children of the black
parent. (Ignore what happens to the keys.) What are the possible degrees of
a black node after all its red children are absorbed? What can you say about
the depths of the leaves of the resulting tree?
13.1-5
Show that the longest simple path from a node x  in a red-black tree to a
descendant leaf has length at most twice that of the shortest simple path
from node x  to a descendant leaf.
13.1-6
What is the lar gest possible number of internal nodes in a red-black tree
with black-height k ? What is the smallest possible number?
13.1-7
Describe a red-black tree on n  keys that realizes the lar gest possible ratio of
red internal nodes to black internal nodes. What is this ratio? What tree has
the smallest possible ratio, and what is the ratio?
13.1-8
Ar gue that in a red-black tree, a red node cannot have exactly one non- NIL
child.
13.2    Rotations
The search-tree operations T REE -I NSER T  and T REE -D ELETE , when run on a
red-black tree with n  keys, take O (lg n ) time. Because they modify the tree,
the result may violate the red-black properties enumerated in Section 13.1 .
T o restore these properties, colors and pointers within nodes need to change.
The pointer structure changes through rotation , which is a local
operation in a search tree that preserves the binary-search-tree property .
Figure 13.2  shows the two kinds of rotations: left rotations and right
Page number: 409
rotations. Let’ s look at a left rotation on a node x , which transforms the
structure on the right side of the figure to the structure on the left. Node x
has a right child y , which must not be T .nil . The left rotation changes the
subtree originally rooted at x  by “twisting” the link between x  and y  to the
left. The new root of the subtree is node y , with x  as y ’ s left child and y ’ s
original left child (the subtree represented by β  in the figure) as x ’ s right
child.
The pseudocode for L EFT -R OT A TE  appearing on the following page
assumes that x.right  ≠ T .nil  and that the root’ s parent is T .nil . Figure 13.3
shows an example of how L EFT -R OT A TE  modifies a binary search tree. The
code for R IGHT -R OT A TE  is symmetric. Both L EFT -R OT A TE  and R IGHT -R OT A TE
run in O (1) time. Only pointers are changed by a rotation, and all other
attributes in a node remain the same.
Figur e 13.2  The rotation operations on a binary search tree. The operation L EFT -R OT A TE ( T , x )
transforms the configuration of the two nodes on the right into the configuration on the left by
changing a constant number of pointers. The inverse operation R IGHT -R OT A TE ( T , y ) transforms the
configuration on the left into the configuration on the right. The letters α , β , and γ  represent arbitrary
subtrees. A rotation operation preserves the binary-search-tree property: the keys in α  precede x.key ,
which precedes the keys in β , which precede y .key , which precedes the keys in γ .
L EFT -R OT A TE ( T , x )
  1 y  = x.right
  2 x.right  = y .left //  turn y ’ s left subtree into x ’ s right subtree
  3 if  y .left  ≠ T .nil //  if y ’ s left subtree is not empty …
  4 y .left.p  = x //  … then x  becomes the parent of the subtree’ s root
  5 y .p  = x.p //  x ’ s parent becomes y ’ s parent
  6 if  x.p  == T .nil //  if x  was the root …
  7 T .r oot  = y //  … then y  becomes the root
  8 elseif  x  == x.p.left //  otherwise, if x  was a left child …
  9 x.p.left  = y //  … then y  becomes a left child
10 else  x.p.right  = y //  otherwise, x  was a right child, and now y  is
1 1 y .left  = x //  make x  become y ’ s left child
12 x.p  = y
Page number: 410
Exer cises
13.2-1
W rite pseudocode for R IGHT -R OT A TE .
Figur e 13.3  An example of how the procedure L EFT -R OT A TE ( T , x ) modifies a binary search tree.
Inorder tree walks of the input tree and the modified tree produce the same listing of key values.
13.2-2
Ar gue that in every n -node binary search tree, there are exactly n  − 1
possible rotations.
13.2-3
Let a , b , and c  be arbitrary nodes in subtrees α , β , and γ , respectively , in the
right tree of Figure 13.2 . How do the depths of a , b , and c  change when a
left rotation is performed on node x  in the figure?
13.2-4
Show that any arbitrary n -node binary search tree can be transformed into
any other arbitrary n -node binary search tree using O ( n ) rotations. ( Hint:
First show that at most n  − 1 right rotations suf fice to transform the tree into
a right-going chain.)
Page number: 411
★  13.2-5
W e say that a binary search tree T1  can be right-converted  to binary search
tree T2  if it is possible to obtain T2  from T1  via a series of calls to R IGHT -
R OT A TE . Give an example of two trees T1  and T2  such that T1  cannot be
right-converted to T2 . Then, show that if a tree T1  can be right-converted to
T2 , it can be right-converted using O ( n2) calls to R IGHT -R OT A TE .
13.3    Insertion
In order to insert a node into a red-black tree with n  internal nodes in O (lg n )
time and maintain the red-black properties, we’ll need to slightly modify the
T REE -I NSER T  procedure on page 321. The procedure RB-I NSER T  starts by
inserting node z  into the tree T  as if it were an ordinary binary search tree,
and then it colors z  red. (Exercise 13.3-1 asks you to explain why to make
node z  red rather than black.) T o guarantee that the red-black properties are
preserved, an auxiliary procedure RB-I NSER T -F IXUP  on the facing page
recolors nodes and performs rotations. The call RB-I NSER T ( T , z ) inserts node
z , whose key  is assumed to have already been filled in, into the red-black
tree T .
RB-I NSER T ( T , z )
  1 x  = T .r oot //  node being compared with z
  2 y  = T .nil //  y  will be parent of z
  3 while  x  ≠ T .nil //  descend until reaching the sentinel
  4 y  = x
  5 if  z.key  < x.key
  6 x  = x.left
  7 else  x  = x.right
  8 z.p  = y //  found the location—insert z  with parent y
  9 if  y  == T .nil
10 T .r oot  = z //  tree T  was empty
1 1 elseif  z.key  < y .key
12 y .left  = z
13 else  y .right  = z
14 z.left  = T .nil //  both of z ’ s children are the sentinel
15 z.right  = T .nil
16 z.color  = RED //  the new node starts out red
17 RB-I NSER T -F IXUP ( T , z ) //  correct any violations of red-black properties
Page number: 412
The procedures T REE -I NSER T  and RB-I NSER T  dif fer in four ways. First, all
instances of NIL  in T REE -I NSER T  are replaced by T .nil . Second, lines 14–15 of
RB-I NSER T  set z.left  and z.right  to T .nil , in order to maintain the proper tree
structure. (T REE -I NSER T  assumed that z ’ s children were already NIL .) Third,
line 16 colors z  red. Fourth, because coloring z  red may cause a violation of
one of the red-black properties, line 17 of RB-I NSER T  calls RB-I NSER T -
F IXUP ( T , z ) in order to restore the red-black properties.
RB-I NSER T -F IXUP ( T , z )
  1 while  z.p.color  == RED
  2 if  z.p  == z.p.p.left //  is z ’ s parent a left child?
  3 y  = z.p.p.right //  y  is z ’ s uncle
  4 if  y .color  == RED //  are z ’ s parent and uncle both red?
  5 z.p.color  = BLACK
  6 y .color  = BLACK
  7 z.p.p.color  = RED
  8 z  = z.p.p
  9 else
10 if  z  == z.p.right
1 1 z  = z.p
12 L EFT -R OT A TE ( T , z )
13 z.p.color  = BLACK
14 z.p.p.color  = RED
15 R IGHT -R OT A TE ( T , z.p.p )
16 else  //  same as lines 3–15, but with “right” and “left” exchanged
17 y  = z.p.p.left
18 if  y .color  == RED
19 z.p.color  = BLACK
20 y .color  = BLACK
21 z.p.p.color  = RED
22 z  = z.p.p
23 else
24 if  z  == z.p.left
25 z  = z.p
26 R IGHT -R OT A TE ( T , z )
27 z.p.color  = BLACK
28 z.p.p.color  = RED
29 L EFT -R OT A TE ( T , z.p.p )
30 T .r oot.color  = BLACK
T o understand how RB-I NSER T -F IXUP  works, let’ s examine the code in
three major steps. First, we’ll determine which violations of the red-black
properties might arise in RB-I NSER T  upon inserting node z  and coloring it
Page number: 413
red. Second, we’ll consider the overall goal of the while  loop in lines 1–29.
Finally , we’ll explore each of the three cases within the while  loop’ s body
(case 2 falls through into case 3, so these two cases are not mutually
exclusive) and see how they accomplish the goal.
In describing the structure of a red-black tree, we’ll often need to refer to
the sibling of a node’ s parent. W e use the term uncle  for such a
node.1 Figure 13.4  shows how RB-I NSER T -F IXUP  operates on a sample red-
black tree, with cases depending in part on the colors of a node, its parent,
and its uncle.
What violations of the red-black properties might occur upon the call to
RB-I NSER T -F IXUP ? Property 1 certainly continues to hold (every node is
either red or black), as does property 3 (every leaf is black), since both
children of the newly inserted red node are the sentinel T .nil . Property 5,
which says that the number of black nodes is the same on every simple path
from a given node, is satisfied as well, because node z  replaces the (black)
sentinel, and node z  is red with sentinel children. Thus, the only properties
that might be violated are property 2, which requires the root to be black,
and property 4, which says that a red node cannot have a red child. Both
possible violations may arise because z  is colored red. Property 2 is violated
if z  is the root, and property 4 is violated if z ’ s parent is red. Figure 13.4(a)
shows a violation of property 4 after the node z  has been inserted.
The while  loop of lines 1–29 has two symmetric possibilities: lines 3–15
deal with the situation in which node z ’ s parent z.p  is a left child of z ’ s
grandparent z.p.p , and lines 17–29 apply when z ’ s parent is a right child.
Our proof will focus only on lines 3–15, relying on the symmetry in lines
17–29.
W e’ll show that the while  loop maintains the following three-part
invariant at the start of each iteration of the loop:
a. Node z  is red.
b. If z.p  is the root, then z.p  is black.
c. If the tree violates any of the red-black properties, then it violates at
most one of them, and the violation is of either property 2 or property
4, but not both. If the tree violates property 2, it is because z  is the root
and is red. If the tree violates property 4, it is because both z  and z.p
are red.
Page number: 414
Part (c), which deals with violations of red-black properties, is more central
to showing that RB-I NSER T -F IXUP  restores the red-black properties than parts
(a) and (b), which we’ll use along the way to understand situations in the
code. Because we’ll be focusing on node z  and nodes near it in the tree, it
helps to know from part (a) that z  is red. Part (b) will help show that z ’ s
grandparent z.p.p  exists when it’ s referenced in lines 2, 3, 7, 8, 14, and 15
(recall that we’re focusing only on lines 3–15).
Page number: 415
Figur e 13.4  The operation of RB-I NSER T -F IXUP . (a)  A node z  after insertion. Because both z  and
its parent z.p  are red, a violation of property 4 occurs. Since z ’ s uncle y  is red, case 1 in the code
applies. Node z ’ s grandparent z.p.p  must be black, and its blackness transfers down one level to z ’ s
parent and uncle. Once the pointer z  moves up two levels in the tree, the tree shown in (b)  results.
Once again, z  and its parent are both red, but this time z ’ s uncle y  is black. Since z  is the right child of
z.p , case 2 applies. Performing a left rotation results in the tree in (c) . Now z  is the left child of its
parent, and case 3 applies. Recoloring and right rotation yield the tree in (d) , which is a legal red-
black tree.
Recall that to use a loop invariant, we need to show that the invariant is
true upon entering the first iteration of the loop, that each iteration maintains
Page number: 416
it, that the loop terminates, and that the loop invariant gives us a useful
property at loop termination. W e’ll see that each iteration of the loop has
two possible outcomes: either the pointer z  moves up the tree, or some
rotations occur and then the loop terminates.
Initialization:  Before RB-I NSER T  is called, the red-black tree has no
violations. RB-I NSER T  adds a red node z  and calls RB-I NSER T -F IXUP . W e’ll
show that each part of the invariant holds at the time RB-I NSER T -F IXUP  is
called:
a. When RB-I NSER T -F IXUP  is called, z  is the red node that was added.
b. If z.p  is the root, then z.p  started out black and did not change before the
call of RB-I NSER T -F IXUP .
c. W e have already seen that properties 1, 3, and 5 hold when RB-
I NSER T F IXUP  is called.
If the tree violates property 2 (the root must be black), then the red root
must be the newly added node z , which is the only internal node in the
tree. Because the parent and both children of z  are the sentinel, which is
black, the tree does not also violate property 4 (both children of a red
node are black). Thus this violation of property 2 is the only violation of
red-black properties in the entire tree.
If the tree violates property 4, then, because the children of node z  are
black sentinels and the tree had no other violations prior to z  being
added, the violation must be because both z  and z.p  are red. Moreover ,
the tree violates no other red-black properties.
Maintenance:  There are six cases within the while  loop, but we’ll examine
only the three cases in lines 3–15, when node z ’ s parent z.p  is a left child
of z ’ s grandparent z.p.p . The proof for lines 17–29 is symmetric. The node
z.p.p  exists, since by part (b) of the loop invariant, if z.p  is the root, then
z.p  is black. Since RB-I NSER T -F IXUP  enters a loop iteration only if z.p  is
red, we know that z.p  cannot be the root. Hence, z.p.p  exists.
Case 1 dif fers from cases 2 and 3 by the color of z ’ s uncle y . Line 3 makes
y  point to z ’ s uncle z.p.p.right , and line 4 tests y ’ s color . If y  is red, then
case 1 executes. Otherwise, control passes to cases 2 and 3. In all three
cases, z ’ s grandparent z.p.p  is black, since its parent z.p  is red, and
property 4 is violated only between z  and z.p .
Page number: 417
Figur e 13.5  Case 1 of the procedure RB-I NSER T -F IXUP . Both z  and its parent z.p  are red, violating
property 4. In case 1, z ’ s uncle y  is red. The same action occurs regardless of whether (a)  z  is a right
child or (b)  z  is a left child. Each of the subtrees α , β , γ , δ , and ϵ  has a black root—possibly the
sentinel—and each has the same black-height. The code for case 1 moves the blackness of z ’ s
grandparent down to z ’ s parent and uncle, preserving property 5: all downward simple paths from a
node to a leaf have the same number of blacks. The while  loop continues with node z ’ s grandparent
z.p.p  as the new z . If the action of case 1 causes a new violation of property 4 to occur , it must be only
between the new z , which is red, and its parent, if it is red as well.
Figur e 13.6  Cases 2 and 3 of the procedure RB-I NSER T -F IXUP . As in case 1, property 4 is violated
in either case 2 or case 3 because z  and its parent z.p  are both red. Each of the subtrees α , β , γ , and δ
has a black root ( α , β , and γ  from property 4, and δ  because otherwise case 1 would apply), and each
has the same black-height. Case 2 transforms into case 3 by a left rotation, which preserves property
5: all downward simple paths from a node to a leaf have the same number of blacks. Case 3 causes
some color changes and a right rotation, which also preserve property 5. The while  loop then
terminates, because property 4 is satisfied: there are no longer two red nodes in a row .
Case 1. z’ s uncle y is red
Page number: 418
Figure 13.5  shows the situation for case 1 (lines 5–8), which occurs
when both z.p  and y  are red. Because z ’ s grandparent z.p.p  is black,
its blackness can transfer down one level to both z.p  and y , thereby
fixing the problem of z  and z.p  both being red. Having had its
blackness transferred down one level, z ’ s grandparent becomes red,
thereby maintaining property 5. The while  loop repeats with z.p.p
as the new node z , so that the pointer z  moves up two levels in the
tree.
Now , we show that case 1 maintains the loop invariant at the start
of the next iteration. W e use z  to denote node z  in the current
iteration, and z ′ = z.p.p  to denote the node that will be called node z
at the test in line 1 upon the next iteration.
a. Because this iteration colors z.p.p  red, node z ′ is red at the start of
the next iteration.
b. The node z ′. p  is z.p.p.p  in this iteration, and the color of this node
does not change. If this node is the root, it was black prior to this
iteration, and it remains black at the start of the next iteration.
c. W e have already ar gued that case 1 maintains property 5, and it
does not introduce a violation of properties 1 or 3.
If node z ′ is the root at the start of the next iteration, then case 1
corrected the lone violation of property 4 in this iteration. Since z ′
is red and it is the root, property 2 becomes the only one that is
violated, and this violation is due to z ′.
If node z ′ is not the root at the start of the next iteration, then case
1 has not created a violation of property 2. Case 1 corrected the
lone violation of property 4 that existed at the start of this
iteration. It then made z ′ red and left z ′. p  alone. If z ′. p  was black,
there is no violation of property 4. If z ′. p  was red, coloring z ′ red
created one violation of property 4, between z ′ and z ′. p .
Case 2. z’ s uncle y is black and z is a right child
Case 3. z’ s uncle y is black and z is a left child
In cases 2 and 3, the color of z ’ s uncle y  is black. W e distinguish the
two cases, which assume that z ’ s parent z.p  is red and a left child,
Page number: 419
according to whether z  is a right or left child of z.p . Lines 1 1–12
constitute case 2, which is shown in Figure 13.6  together with case
3. In case 2, node z  is a right child of its parent. A left rotation
immediately transforms the situation into case 3 (lines 13–15), in
which node z  is a left child. Because both z  and z.p  are red, the
rotation af fects neither the black-heights of nodes nor property 5.
Whether case 3 executes directly or through case 2, z ’ s uncle y  is
black, since otherwise case 1 would have run. Additionally , the
node z.p.p  exists, since we have ar gued that this node existed at the
time that lines 2 and 3 were executed, and after moving z  up one
level in line 1 1 and then down one level in line 12, the identity of
z.p.p  remains unchanged. Case 3 performs some color changes and
a right rotation, which preserve property 5. At this point, there are
no longer two red nodes in a row . The while  loop terminates upon
the next test in line 1, since z.p  is now black.
W e now show that cases 2 and 3 maintain the loop invariant. (As
we have just ar gued, z.p  will be black upon the next test in line 1,
and the loop body will not execute again.)
a. Case 2 makes z  point to z.p , which is red. No further change to z
or its color occurs in cases 2 and 3.
b. Case 3 makes z.p  black, so that if z.p  is the root at the start of the
next iteration, it is black.
c. As in case 1, properties 1, 3, and 5 are maintained in cases 2 and
3.
Since node z  is not the root in cases 2 and 3, we know that there is
no violation of property 2. Cases 2 and 3 do not introduce a
violation of property 2, since the only node that is made red
becomes a child of a black node by the rotation in case 3.
Cases 2 and 3 correct the lone violation of property 4, and they do
not introduce another violation.
T ermination:  T o see that the loop terminates, observe that if only case 1
occurs, then the node pointer z  moves toward the root in each iteration, so
that eventually z.p  is black. (If z  is the root, then z.p  is the sentinel T .nil ,
which is black.) If either case 2 or case 3 occurs, then we’ve seen that the
Page number: 420
loop terminates. Since the loop terminates because z.p  is black, the tree
does not violate property 4 at loop termination. By the loop invariant, the
only property that might fail to hold is property 2. Line 30 restores this
property by coloring the root black, so that when RB-I NSER T -F IXUP
terminates, all the red-black properties hold.
Thus, we have shown that RB-I NSER T -F IXUP  correctly restores the red-
black properties.
Analysis
What is the running time of RB-I NSER T ? Since the height of a red-black tree
on n  nodes is O (lg n ), lines 1–16 of RB-I NSER T  take O (lg n ) time. In RB-
I NSER T F IXUP , the while  loop repeats only if case 1 occurs, and then the
pointer z  moves two levels up the tree. The total number of times the while
loop can be executed is therefore O (lg n ). Thus, RB-I NSER T  takes a total of
O (lg n ) time. Moreover , it never performs more than two rotations, since the
while  loop terminates if case 2 or case 3 is executed.
Exer cises
13.3-1
Line 16 of RB-I NSER T  sets the color of the newly inserted node z  to red. If
instead z ’ s color were set to black, then property 4 of a red-black tree would
not be violated. Why not set z ’ s color to black?
13.3-2
Show the red-black trees that result after successively inserting the keys 41,
38, 31, 12, 19, 8 into an initially empty red-black tree.
13.3-3
Suppose that the black-height of each of the subtrees α , β , γ , δ , ϵ  in Figures
13.5  and 13.6  is k . Label each node in each figure with its black-height to
verify that the indicated transformation preserves property 5.
13.3-4
Professor T each is concerned that RB-I NSER T -F IXUP  might set T .nil.color  to
RED , in which case the test in line 1 would not cause the loop to terminate
when z  is the root. Show that the professor ’ s concern is unfounded by
ar guing that RB-I NSER T -F IXUP  never sets T .nil.color  to RED .
Page number: 421
13.3-5
Consider a red-black tree formed by inserting n  nodes with RB-I NSER T .
Ar gue that if n  > 1, the tree has at least one red node.
13.3-6
Suggest how to implement RB-I NSER T  ef ficiently if the representation for
red-black trees includes no storage for parent pointers.
13.4    Deletion
Like the other basic operations on an n -node red-black tree, deletion of a
node takes O (lg n ) time. Deleting a node from a red-black tree is more
complicated than inserting a node.
The procedure for deleting a node from a red-black tree is based on the
T REE -D ELETE  procedure on page 325. First, we need to customize the
T RANSPLANT  subroutine on page 324 that T REE -D ELETE  calls so that it
applies to a red-black tree. Like T RANSPLANT , the new procedure RB-
T RANSPLANT  replaces the subtree rooted at node u  by the subtree rooted at
node v . The RB-T RANSPLANT  procedure dif fers from T RANSPLANT  in two
ways. First, line 1 references the sentinel T .nil  instead of NIL . Second, the
assignment to v .p  in line 6 occurs unconditionally: the procedure can assign
to v .p  even if v  points to the sentinel. W e’ll take advantage of the ability to
assign to v .p  when v  = T .nil .
RB-T RANSPLANT ( T , u , v )
1 if  u.p  == T .nil
2 T .r oot  = v
3 elseif  u  == u.p.left
4 u.p.left  = v
5 else  u.p.right  = v
6 v .p  = u.p
The procedure RB-D ELETE  on the next page is like the T REE -D ELETE
procedure, but with additional lines of pseudocode. The additional lines deal
with nodes x  and y  that may be involved in violations of the red-black
properties. When the node z  being deleted has at most one child, then y  will
be z . When z  has two children, then, as in T REE -D ELETE , y  will be z ’ s
successor , which has no left child and moves into z ’ s position in the tree.
Page number: 422
Additionally , y  takes on z ’ s color . In either case, node y  has at most one
child: node x , which takes y ’ s place in the tree. (Node x  will be the sentinel
T .nil  if y  has no children.) Since node y  will be either removed from the tree
or moved within the tree, the procedure needs to keep track of y ’ s original
color . If the red-black properties might be violated after deleting node z , RB-
D ELETE  calls the auxiliary procedure RB-D ELETE -F IXUP , which changes
colors and performs rotations to restore the red-black properties.
Although RB-D ELETE  contains almost twice as many lines of pseudocode
as T REE -D ELETE , the two procedures have the same basic structure. Y ou can
find each line of T REE -D ELETE  within RB-D ELETE  (with the changes of
replacing NIL  by T .nil  and replacing calls to T RANSPLANT  by calls to RB-
T RANSPLANT ), executed under the same conditions.
In detail, here are the other dif ferences between the two procedures:
Lines 1 and 9 set node y  as described above: line 1 when node z  has at
most one child and line 9 when z  has two children.
Because node y ’ s color might change, the variable y-original-color
stores y ’ s color before any changes occur . Lines 2 and 10 set this
variable immediately after assignments to y . When node z  has two
children, then nodes y  and z  are distinct. In this case, line 17 moves y
into z ’ s original position in the tree (that is, z ’ s location in the tree at
the time RB-D ELETE  was called), and line 20 gives y  the same color as
z . When node y  was originally black, removing or moving it could
cause violations of the red-black properties, which are corrected by
the call of RB-D ELETE -F IXUP  in line 22.
RB-D ELETE ( T , z )
  1 y  = z  
  2 y-original-color  = y .color  
  3 if  z.left  == T .nil  
  4 x  = z.right  
  5 RB-T RANSPLANT ( T , z , z.right ) //  replace z  by its right child
  6 elseif  z.right  == T .nil  
  7 x  = z.left  
  8 RB-T RANSPLANT ( T , z , z.left ) //  replace z  by its left child
  9 else  y  = T REE -M INIMUM ( z.right ) //  y  is z ’ s successor
10 y-original-color  = y .color  
1 1 x  = y .right  
12 if  y  ≠ z.right  //  is y  farther down the tree?
13 RB-T RANSPLANT ( T , y , y .right ) //  replace y  by its right child
14 y .right  = z.right  //  z ’ s right child becomes
Page number: 423
15 y .right.p  = y  //    y ’ s right child
16 else  x.p  = y  //  in case x  is T .nil
17 RB-T RANSPLANT ( T , z , y )  //  replace z  by its successor y
18 y .left  = z.left  //  and give z ’ s left child to y ,
19 y .left.p  = y  //        which had no left child
20 y .color  = z.color  
21 if  y-original-color  == BLACK //  if any red-black violations occurred,
22 RB-D ELETE -F IXUP ( T , x ) //        correct them
As discussed, the procedure keeps track of the node x  that moves into
node y ’ s original position at the time of call. The assignments in lines
4, 7, and 1 1 set x  to point to either y ’ s only child or , if y  has no
children, the sentinel T .nil .
Since node x  moves into node y ’ s original position, the attribute x.p
must be set correctly . If node z  has two children and y  is z ’ s right
child, then y  just moves into z ’ s position, with x  remaining a child of
y . Line 12 checks for this case. Although you might think that setting
x.p  to y  in line 16 is unnecessary since x  is a child of y , the call of RB-
D ELETE -F IXUP  relies on x.p  being y  even if x  is T .nil . Thus, when z  has
two children and y  is z ’ s right child, executing line 16 is necessary if
y ’ s right child is T .nil , and otherwise it does not change anything.
Otherwise, node z  is either the same as node y  or it is a proper
ancestor of y ’ s original parent. In these cases, the calls of RB-
T RANSPLANT  in lines 5, 8, and 13 set x.p  correctly in line 6 of RB-
T RANSPLANT . (In these calls of RB-T RANSPLANT , the third parameter
passed is the same as x .)
Finally , if node y  was black, one or more violations of the red-black
properties might arise. The call of RB-D ELETE -F IXUP  in line 22
restores the red-black properties. If y  was red, the red-black properties
still hold when y  is removed or moved, for the following reasons:
1 . No black-heights in the tree have changed. (See Exercise 13.4-
1.)
2 . No red nodes have been made adjacent. If z  has at most one
child, then y  and z  are the same node. That node is removed,
with a child taking its place. If the removed node was red,
then neither its parent nor its children can also be red, so
moving a child to take its place cannot cause two red nodes to
Page number: 424
become adjacent. If, on the other hand, z  has two children,
then y  takes z ’ s place in the tree, along with z ’ s color , so there
cannot be two adjacent red nodes at y ’ s new position in the
tree. In addition, if y  was not z ’ s right child, then y ’ s original
right child x  replaces y  in the tree. Since y  is red, x  must be
black, and so replacing y  by x  cannot cause two red nodes to
become adjacent.
3 . Because y  could not have been the root if it was red, the root
remains black.
If node y  was black, three problems may arise, which the call of RB-
D ELETE -F IXUP  will remedy . First, if y  was the root and a red child of y
became the new root, property 2 is violated. Second, if both x  and its new
parent are red, then a violation of property 4 occurs. Third, moving y  within
the tree causes any simple path that previously contained y  to have one less
black node. Thus, property 5 is now violated by any ancestor of y  in the tree.
W e can correct the violation of property 5 by saying that when the black
node y  is removed or moved, its blackness transfers to the node x  that moves
into y ’ s original position, giving x  an “extra” black. That is, if we add 1 to
the count of black nodes on any simple path that contains x , then under this
interpretation, property 5 holds. But now another problem emer ges: node x
is neither red nor black, thereby violating property 1. Instead, node x  is
either “doubly black” or “red-and-black,” and it contributes either 2 or 1,
respectively , to the count of black nodes on simple paths containing x . The
color  attribute of x  will still be either RED  (if x  is red-and-black) or BLACK  (if
x  is doubly black). In other words, the extra black on a node is reflected in
x ’ s pointing to the node rather than in the color  attribute.
The procedure RB-D ELETE -F IXUP  on the next page restores properties 1,
2, and 4. Exercises 13.4-2 and 13.4-3 ask you to show that the procedure
restores properties 2 and 4, and so in the remainder of this section, we focus
on property 1. The goal of the while  loop in lines 1–43 is to move the extra
black up the tree until
1 . x  points to a red-and-black node, in which case line 44 colors x
(singly) black;
2 . x  points to the root, in which case the extra black simply vanishes; or
3 . having performed suitable rotations and recolorings, the loop exits.
Page number: 425
Like RB-I NSER T -F IXUP , the RB-D ELETE -F IXUP  procedure handles two
symmetric situations: lines 3–22 for when node x  is a left child, and lines
24–43 for when x  is a right child. Our proof focuses on the four cases shown
in lines 3–22.
W ithin the while  loop, x  always points to a nonroot doubly black node.
Line 2 determines whether x  is a left child or a right child of its parent x.p  so
that either lines 3–22 or 24–43 will execute in a given iteration. The sibling
of x  is always denoted by a pointer w . Since node x  is doubly black, node w
cannot be T .nil , because otherwise, the number of blacks on the simple path
from x.p  to the (singly black) leaf w  would be smaller than the number on
the simple path from x.p  to x .
Recall that the RB-D ELETE  procedure always assigns to x.p  before calling
RB-D ELETE -F IXUP  (either within the call of RB-T RANSPLANT  in line 13 or
the assignment in line 16), even when node x  is the sentinel T .nil . That is
because RB-D ELETE -F IXUP  references x ’ s parent x.p  in several places, and
this attribute must point to the node that became x ’ s parent in RB-D ELETE —
even if x  is T .nil .
Figure 13.7  demonstrates the four cases in the code when node x  is a left
child. (As in RB-I NSER T -F IXUP , the cases in RB-D ELETE -F IXUP  are not
mutually exclusive.) Before examining each case in detail, let’ s look more
generally at how we can verify that the transformation in each of the cases
preserves property 5. The key idea is that in each case, the transformation
applied preserves the number of black nodes (including x ’ s extra black)
from (and including) the root of the subtree shown to the roots of each of the
subtrees α , β , …, ζ . Thus, if property 5 holds prior to the transformation, it
continues to hold afterward. For example, in Figure 13.7(a) , which
illustrates case 1, the number of black nodes from the root to the root of
either subtree α  or β  is 3, both before and after the transformation. (Again,
remember that node x  adds an extra black.) Similarly , the number of black
nodes from the root to the root of any of γ , δ , ϵ , and ζ  is 2, both before and
after the transformation.2 In Figure 13.7(b) , the counting must involve the
value c  of the color  attribute of the root of the subtree shown, which can be
either RED  or BLACK .
RB-D ELETE -F IXUP ( T , x )
  1 while  x  ≠ T .r oot  and x.color  == BLACK
  2 if  x  == x.p.left //  is x  a left child?
  3 w  = x.p.right //  w  is x ’ s sibling
Page number: 426
  4 if  w .color  == RED
  5 w .color  = BLACK
  6 x.p.color  = RED
  7 L EFT -R OT A TE ( T , x.p )
  8 w  = x.p.right
  9 if  w .left.color  == BLACK  and w .right.color  == BLACK
10 w .color  = RED
1 1 x  = x.p
12 else
13 if  w .right.color  == BLACK
14 w .left.color  = BLACK
15 w .color  = RED
16 R IGHT -R OT A TE ( T , w )
17 w  = x.p.right
18 w .color  = x.p.color
19 x.p.color  = BLACK
20 w .right.color  = BLACK
21 L EFT -R OT A TE ( T , x.p )
22 x  = T .r oot
23 else  //  same as lines 3–22, but with “right” and “left” exchanged
24 w  = x.p.left
25 if  w .color  == RED
26 w .color  = BLACK
27 x.p.color  = RED
28 R IGHT -R OT A TE ( T , x.p )
29 w  = x.p.left
30 if  w .right.color  == BLACK  and w .left.color  == BLACK
31 w .color  = RED
32 x  = x.p
33 else
34 if  w .left.color  == BLACK
35 w .right.color  = BLACK
36 w .color  = RED
37 L EFT -R OT A TE ( T , w )
38 w  = x.p.left
39 w .color  = x.p.color
40 x.p.color  = BLACK
41 w .left.color  = BLACK
42 R IGHT -R OT A TE ( T , x.p )
43 x  = T .r oot
44 x.color  = BLACK
Page number: 427
Figur e 13.7  The cases in lines 3–22 of the procedure RB-D ELETE -F IXUP . Brown nodes have color
attributes represented by c  and c ′, which may be either RED  or BLACK . The letters α , β , …, ζ
represent arbitrary subtrees. Each case transforms the configuration on the left into the configuration
on the right by changing some colors and/or performing a rotation. Any node pointed to by x  has an
extra black and is either doubly black or red-and-black. Only case 2 causes the loop to repeat. (a)
Case 1 is transformed into case 2, 3, or 4 by exchanging the colors of nodes B  and D  and performing a
left rotation. (b)  In case 2, the extra black represented by the pointer x  moves up the tree by coloring
node D  red and setting x  to point to node B . If case 2 is entered through case 1, the while  loop
terminates because the new node x  is red-and-black, and therefore the value c  of its color  attribute is
RED . (c)  Case 3 is transformed to case 4 by exchanging the colors of nodes C  and D  and performing a
right rotation. (d)  Case 4 removes the extra black represented by x  by changing some colors and
performing a left rotation (without violating the red-black properties), and then the loop terminates.
If we define count( RED ) = 0 and count( BLACK ) = 1, then the number of black
nodes from the root to α  is 2 + count( c ), both before and after the
Page number: 428
transformation. In this case, after the transformation, the new node x  has
color  attribute c , but this node is really either red-and-black (if c  = RED ) or
doubly black (if c  = BLACK ). Y ou can verify the other cases similarly (see
Exercise 13.4-6).
Case 1. x’ s sibling w is red
Case 1 (lines 5–8 and Figure 13.7(a) ) occurs when node w , the sibling of
node x , is red. Because w  is red, it must have black children. This case
switches the colors of w  and x.p  and then performs a left-rotation on x.p
without violating any of the red-black properties. The new sibling of x ,
which is one of w ’ s children prior to the rotation, is now black, and thus case
1 converts into one of cases 2, 3, or 4.
Cases 2, 3, and 4 occur when node w  is black and are distinguished by
the colors of w ’ s children.
Case 2. x’ s sibling w is black, and both of w’ s children are black
In case 2 (lines 10–1 1 and Figure 13.7(b) ), both of w ’ s children are black.
Since w  is also black, this case removes one black from both x  and w ,
leaving x  with only one black and leaving w  red. T o compensate for x  and w
each losing one black, x ’ s parent x.p  can take on an extra black. Line 1 1 does
so by moving x  up one level, so that the while  loop repeats with x.p  as the
new node x . If case 2 enters through case 1, the new node x  is red-and-black,
since the original x.p  was red. Hence, the value c  of the color  attribute of the
new node x  is RED , and the loop terminates when it tests the loop condition.
Line 44 then colors the new node x  (singly) black.
Case 3. x’ s sibling w is black, w’ s left child is red, and w’ s right child is
black
Case 3 (lines 14–17 and Figure 13.7(c) ) occurs when w  is black, its left child
is red, and its right child is black. This case switches the colors of w  and its
left child w .left  and then performs a right rotation on w  without violating any
of the red-black properties. The new sibling w  of x  is now a black node with
a red right child, and thus case 3 falls through into case 4.
Case 4. x’ s sibling w is black, and w’ s right child is red
Case 4 (lines 18–22 and Figure 13.7(d) ) occurs when node x ’ s sibling w  is
black and w ’ s right child is red. Some color changes and a left rotation on
Page number: 429
x.p  allow the extra black on x  to vanish, making it singly black, without
violating any of the red-black properties. Line 22 sets x  to be the root, and
the while  loop terminates when it next tests the loop condition.
Analysis
What is the running time of RB-D ELETE ? Since the height of a red-black tree
of n  nodes is O (lg n ), the total cost of the procedure without the call to RB-
D ELETE -F IXUP  takes O (lg n ) time. W ithin RB-D ELETE -F IXUP , each of cases
1, 3, and 4 lead to termination after performing a constant number of color
changes and at most three rotations. Case 2 is the only case in which the
while  loop can be repeated, and then the pointer x  moves up the tree at most
O (lg n ) times, performing no rotations. Thus, the procedure RB-D ELETE -
F IXUP  takes O (lg n ) time and performs at most three rotations, and the
overall time for RB-D ELETE  is therefore also O (lg n ).
Exer cises
13.4-1
Show that if node y  in RB-D ELETE  is red, then no black-heights change.
13.4-2
Ar gue that after RB-D ELETE -F IXUP  executes, the root of the tree must be
black.
13.4-3
Ar gue that if in RB-D ELETE  both x  and x.p  are red, then property 4 is
restored by the call to RB-D ELETE -F IXUP ( T , x ).
13.4-4
In Exercise 13.3-2 on page 346, you found the red-black tree that results
from successively inserting the keys 41, 38, 31, 12, 19, 8 into an initially
empty tree. Now show the red-black trees that result from the successive
deletion of the keys in the order 8, 12, 19, 31, 38, 41.
13.4-5
Which lines of the code for RB-D ELETE -F IXUP  might examine or modify the
sentinel T .nil ?
13.4-6
Page number: 430
In each of the cases of Figure 13.7 , give the count of black nodes from the
root of the subtree shown to the roots of each of the subtrees α , β , …, ζ , and
verify that each count remains the same after the transformation. When a
node has a color  attribute c  or c ′, use the notation count( c ) or count( c ′)
symbolically in your count.
13.4-7
Professors Skelton and Baron worry that at the start of case 1 of RB-
D ELETE -F IXUP , the node x.p  might not be black. If x.p  is not black, then lines
5–6 are wrong. Show that x.p  must be black at the start of case 1, so that the
professors need not be concerned.
13.4-8
A node x  is inserted into a red-black tree with RB-I NSER T  and then is
immediately deleted with RB-D ELETE . Is the resulting red-black tree always
the same as the initial red-black tree? Justify your answer .
★  13.4-9
Consider the operation RB-E NUMERA TE ( T , r , a , b ), which outputs all the
keys k  such that a  ≤ k  ≤ b  in a subtree rooted at node r  in an n -node red-
black tree T . Describe how to implement RB-E NUMERA TE  in Θ( m  + lg n )
time, where m  is the number of keys that are output. Assume that the keys in
T  are unique and that the values a  and b  appear as keys in T . How does your
solution change if a  and b  might not appear in T ?
Pr oblems
13-1     Persistent dynamic sets
During the course of an algorithm, you sometimes find that you need to
maintain past versions of a dynamic set as it is updated. W e call such a set
persistent . One way to implement a persistent set is to copy the entire set
whenever it is modified, but this approach can slow down a program and
also consume a lot of space. Sometimes, you can do much better .
Consider a persistent set S  with the operations I NSER T , D ELETE , and
S EARCH , which you implement using binary search trees as shown in Figure
13.8(a) . Maintain a separate root for every version of the set. In order to
insert the key 5 into the set, create a new node with key 5. This node
Page number: 431
becomes the left child of a new node with key 7, since you cannot modify
the existing node with key 7. Similarly , the new node with key 7 becomes
the left child of a new node with key 8 whose right child is the existing node
with key 10. The new node with key 8 becomes, in turn, the right child of a
new root r ′ with key 4 whose left child is the existing node with key 3. Thus,
you copy only part of the tree and share some of the nodes with the original
tree, as shown in Figure 13.8(b) .
Assume that each tree node has the attributes key , left , and right  but no
parent. (See also Exercise 13.3-6 on page 346.)
a.  For a persistent binary search tree (not a red-black tree, just a binary
search tree), identify the nodes that need to change to insert or delete a
node.
Figur e 13.8 (a)  A binary search tree with keys 2, 3, 4, 7, 8, 10. (b)  The persistent binary search tree
that results from the insertion of key 5. The most recent version of the set consists of the nodes
reachable from the root r ′, and the previous version consists of the nodes reachable from r . Blue nodes
are added when key 5 is inserted.
b.  W rite a procedure P ERSISTENT -T REE -I NSER T ( T , z ) that, given a persistent
binary search tree T  and a node z  to insert, returns a new persistent tree T ′
that is the result of inserting z  into T . Assume that you have a procedure
C OPY -N ODE ( x ) that makes a copy of node x , including all of its attributes.
c.  If the height of the persistent binary search tree T  is h , what are the time
and space requirements of your implementation of P ERSISTENT -T REE -
I NSER T ? (The space requirement is proportional to the number of nodes
that are copied.)
d.  Suppose that you include the parent attribute in each node. In this case,
the P ERSISTENT -T REE -I NSER T  procedure needs to perform additional
Page number: 432
copying. Prove that P ERSISTENT -T REE -I NSER T  then requires Ω( n ) time and
space, where n  is the number of nodes in the tree.
e.  Show how to use red-black trees to guarantee that the worst-case running
time and space are O (lg n ) per insertion or deletion. Y ou may assume that
all keys are distinct.
13-2     Join operation on red-black trees
The join  operation takes two dynamic sets S1  and S2  and an element x  such
that for any x1  ∈  S1  and x2  ∈  S2 , we have x1 . key  ≤ x.key  ≤ x2 . key . It returns
a set S  = S1  ⋃  { x } ⋃  S2 . In this problem, we investigate how to implement
the join operation on red-black trees.
a.  Suppose that you store the black-height of a red-black tree T  as the new
attribute T .bh . Ar gue that RB-I NSER T  and RB-D ELETE  can maintain the
bh  attribute without requiring extra storage in the nodes of the tree and
without increasing the asymptotic running times. Show how to determine
the black-height of each node visited while descending through T , using
O (1) time per node visited.
Let T1  and T2  be red-black trees and x  be a key value such that for any nodes
x1  in T1  and x2  in T2 , we have x1 . key  ≤ x.key  ≤ x2 . key . Y ou will show how to
implement the operation RB-J OIN ( T1 , x , T2 ), which destroys T1  and T2  and
returns a red-black tree T  = T1  ⋃  { x } ⋃  T2 . Let n  be the total number of
nodes in T1  and T2 .
b.  Assume that T1 . bh  ≥ T2 . bh . Describe an O (lg n )-time algorithm that finds
a black node y  in T1  with the lar gest key from among those nodes whose
black-height is T2 . bh .
c.  Let Ty  be the subtree rooted at y . Describe how Ty  ⋃  { x } ⋃  T2  can replace
Ty  in O (1) time without destroying the binary-search-tree property .
d.  What color should you make x  so that red-black properties 1, 3, and 5 are
maintained? Describe how to enforce properties 2 and 4 in O (lg n ) time.
e.  Ar gue that no generality is lost by making the assumption in part (b).
Describe the symmetric situation that arises when T1 . bh  ≤ T2 . bh .
Page number: 433
f.  Ar gue that the running time of RB-J OIN  is O (lg n ).
13-3     A VL trees
An A VL tree  is a binary search tree that is height balanced : for each node x ,
the heights of the left and right subtrees of x  dif fer by at most 1. T o
implement an A VL tree, maintain an extra attribute h  in each node such that
x.h  is the height of node x . As for any other binary search tree T , assume that
T .r oot  points to the root node.
a.  Prove that an A VL tree with n  nodes has height O (lg n ). ( Hint:  Prove that
an A VL tree of height h  has at least Fh  nodes, where Fh  is the h th
Fibonacci number .)
b.  T o insert into an A VL tree, first place a node into the appropriate place in
binary search tree order . Afterward, the tree might no longer be height
balanced. Specifically , the heights of the left and right children of some
node might dif fer by 2. Describe a procedure B ALANCE ( x ), which takes a
subtree rooted at x  whose left and right children are height balanced and
have heights that dif fer by at most 2, so that | x.right.h  − x.left.h | ≤ 2, and
alters the subtree rooted at x  to be height balanced. The procedure should
return a pointer to the node that is the root of the subtree after alterations
occur . ( Hint:  Use rotations.)
c.  Using part (b), describe a recursive procedure A VL-I NSER T ( T , z ) that takes
an A VL tree T  and a newly created node z  (whose key has already been
filled in), and adds z  into T , maintaining the property that T  is an A VL
tree. As in T REE -I NSER T  from Section 12.3 , assume that z.key  has already
been filled in and that z.left  = NIL  and z.right  = NIL . Assume as well that
z.h  = 0.
d.  Show that A VL-I NSER T , run on an n -node A VL tree, takes O (lg n ) time
and performs O (lg n ) rotations.
Chapter notes
The idea of balancing a search tree is due to Adel’ son-V el’ ski ĭ  and Landis
[ 2 ], who introduced a class of balanced search trees called “A VL trees” in
1962, described in Problem 13-3. Another class of search trees, called “2-3
trees,” was introduced by J. E. Hopcroft (unpublished) in 1970. A 2-3 tree
Page number: 434
maintains balance by manipulating the degrees of nodes in the tree, where
each node has either two or three children. Chapter 18  covers a
generalization of 2-3 trees introduced by Bayer and McCreight [ 39 ], called
“B-trees.”
Red-black trees were invented by Bayer [ 38 ] under the name “symmetric
binary B-trees.” Guibas and Sedgewick [ 202 ] studied their properties at
length and introduced the red/black color convention. Andersson [ 16 ] gives
a simpler -to-code variant of red-black trees. W eiss [ 451 ] calls this variant
AA-trees. An AA-tree is similar to a red-black tree except that left children
can never be red.
Sedgewick and W ayne [ 402 ] present red-black trees as a modified
version of 2-3 trees in which a node with three children is split into two
nodes with two children each. One of these nodes becomes the left child of
the other , and only left children can be red. They call this structure a “left-
leaning red-black binary search tree.” Although the code for left-leaning
red-black binary search trees is more concise than the red-black tree
pseudocode in this chapter , operations on left-leaning red-black binary
search trees do not limit the number of rotations per operation to a constant.
This distinction will matter in Chapter 17 .
T reaps, a hybrid of binary search trees and heaps, were proposed by
Seidel and Aragon [ 404 ]. They are the default implementation of a
dictionary in LEDA [ 324 ], which is a well-implemented collection of data
structures and algorithms.
There are many other variations on balanced binary trees, including
weight-balanced trees [ 344 ], k -neighbor trees [ 318 ], and scapegoat trees
[ 174 ]. Perhaps the most intriguing are the “splay trees” introduced by
Sleator and T arjan [ 418 ], which are “self-adjusting.” (See T arjan [ 429 ] for a
good description of splay trees.) Splay trees maintain balance without any
explicit balance condition such as color . Instead, “splay operations” (which
involve rotations) are performed within the tree every time an access is
made. The amortized cost (see Chapter 16 ) of each operation on an n -node
tree is O (lg n ). Splay trees have been conjectured to perform within a
constant factor of the best of fline rotation-based tree. The best known
competitive ratio (see Chapter 27 ) for a rotation-based tree is the T ango T ree
of Demaine et al. [ 109 ].
Skip lists [ 369 ] provide an alternative to balanced binary trees. A skip
list is a linked list that is augmented with a number of additional pointers.
Page number: 435
Each dictionary operation runs in O (lg n ) expected time on a skip list of n
items.
1 Although we try to avoid gendered language in this book, the English language lacks a gender -
neutral word for a parent’ s sibling.
2 If property 5 holds, we can assume that paths from the roots of γ , δ , ϵ , and ζ  down to leaves contain
one more black than do paths from the roots of α  and β  down to leaves.
Page number: 436
Part IV     Advanced Design and Analysis T echniques
Page number: 437
 
 
Intr oduction
This part covers three important techniques used in designing and analyzing
ef ficient algorithms: dynamic programming ( Chapter 14 ), greedy
algorithms ( Chapter 15 ), and amortized analysis ( Chapter 16 ). Earlier parts
have presented other widely applicable techniques, such as divide-and-
conquer , randomization, and how to solve recurrences. The techniques in
this part are somewhat more sophisticated, but you will be able to use them
solve many computational problems. The themes introduced in this part will
recur later in this book.
Dynamic programming typically applies to optimization problems in
which you make a set of choices in order to arrive at an optimal solution,
each choice generates subproblems of the same form as the original
problem, and the same subproblems arise repeatedly . The key strategy is to
store the solution to each such subproblem rather than recompute it.
Chapter 14  shows how this simple idea can sometimes transform
exponential-time algorithms into polynomial-time algorithms.
Like dynamic-programming algorithms, greedy algorithms typically
apply to optimization problems in which you make a set of choices in order
to arrive at an optimal solution. The idea of a greedy algorithm is to make
each choice in a locally optimal manner , resulting in a faster algorithm than
you get with dynamic programming. Chapter 15  will help you determine
when the greedy approach works.
The technique of amortized analysis applies to certain algorithms that
perform a sequence of similar operations. Instead of bounding the cost of
the sequence of operations by bounding the actual cost of each operation
separately , an amortized analysis provides a worst-case bound on the actual
Page number: 438
cost of the entire sequence. One advantage of this approach is that although
some operations might be expensive, many others might be cheap. Y ou can
use amortized analysis when designing algorithms, since the design of an
algorithm and the analysis of its running time are often closely intertwined.
Chapter 16  introduces three ways to perform an amortized analysis of an
algorithm.
Page number: 439
14        Dynamic Pr ogramming
Dynamic programming, like the divide-and-conquer method, solves
problems by combining the solutions to subproblems. (“Programming” in
this context refers to a tabular method, not to writing computer code.) As
we saw in Chapters 2  and 4 , divide-and-conquer algorithms partition the
problem into disjoint subproblems, solve the subproblems recursively , and
then combine their solutions to solve the original problem. In contrast,
dynamic programming applies when the subproblems overlap—that is,
when subproblems share subsubproblems. In this context, a divide-and-
conquer algorithm does more work than necessary , repeatedly solving the
common subsubproblems. A dynamic-programming algorithm solves each
subsubproblem just once and then saves its answer in a table, thereby
avoiding the work of recomputing the answer every time it solves each
subsubproblem.
Dynamic programming typically applies to optimization problems . Such
problems can have many possible solutions. Each solution has a value, and
you want to find a solution with the optimal (minimum or maximum) value.
W e call such a solution an  optimal solution to the problem, as opposed to
the  optimal solution, since there may be several solutions that achieve the
optimal value.
T o develop a dynamic-programming algorithm, follow a sequence of
four steps:
1 . Characterize the structure of an optimal solution.
2 . Recursively define the value of an optimal solution.
3 . Compute the value of an optimal solution, typically in a bottom-up
fashion.
Page number: 440
4 . Construct an optimal solution from computed information.
Steps 1–3 form the basis of a dynamic-programming solution to a problem.
If you need only the value of an optimal solution, and not the solution itself,
then you can omit step 4. When you do perform step 4, it often pays to
maintain additional information during step 3 so that you can easily
construct an optimal solution.
The sections that follow use the dynamic-programming method to solve
some optimization problems. Section 14.1  examines the problem of cutting
a rod into rods of smaller length in a way that maximizes their total value.
Section 14.2  shows how to multiply a chain of matrices while performing
the fewest total scalar multiplications. Given these examples of dynamic
programming, Section 14.3  discusses two key characteristics that a problem
must have for dynamic programming to be a viable solution technique.
Section 14.4  then shows how to find the longest common subsequence of
two sequences via dynamic programming. Finally , Section 14.5  uses
dynamic programming to construct binary search trees that are optimal,
given a known distribution of keys to be looked up.
14.1    Rod cutting
Our first example uses dynamic programming to solve a simple problem in
deciding where to cut steel rods. Serling Enterprises buys long steel rods
and cuts them into shorter rods, which it then sells. Each cut is free. The
management of Serling Enterprises wants to know the best way to cut up
the rods.
Serling Enterprises has a table giving, for i  = 1, 2, …, the price pi  in
dollars that they char ge for a rod of length i  inches. The length of each rod
in inches is always an integer . Figure 14.1  gives a sample price table.
The rod-cutting problem  is the following. Given a rod of length n  inches
and a table of prices pi  for i  = 1, 2, …, n , determine the maximum revenue
rn  obtainable by cutting up the rod and selling the pieces. If the price pn  for
a rod of length n  is lar ge enough, an optimal solution might require no
cutting at all.
Consider the case when n  = 4. Figure 14.2  shows all the ways to cut up a
rod of 4 inches in length, including the way with no cuts at all. Cutting a 4-
Page number: 441
inch rod into two 2-inch pieces produces revenue p2  + p2  = 5 + 5 = 10,
which is optimal.
Serling Enterprises can cut up a rod of length n  in 2n −1 dif ferent ways,
since they have an independent option of cutting, or not cutting, at distance
i  inches from the left end, for i  = 1, 2, …, n  − 1.1 W e denote a
decomposition into pieces using ordinary additive notation, so that 7 = 2 + 2
+ 3 indicates that a rod of length 7 is cut into three pieces—two of length 2
and one of length 3. If an optimal solution cuts the rod into k  pieces, for
some 1 ≤ k  ≤ n , then an optimal decomposition
n  = i1  + i2  + ⋯  + ik
Figur e 14.1  A sample price table for rods. Each rod of length i  inches earns the company p i  dollars
of revenue.
Figur e 14.2  The 8 possible ways of cutting up a rod of length 4. Above each piece is the value of that
piece, according to the sample price chart of Figure 14.1 . The optimal strategy is part (c)—cutting the
rod into two pieces of length 2—which has total value 10.
of the rod into pieces of lengths i1 , i2 , …, ik  provides maximum
corresponding revenue
For the sample problem in Figure 14.1 , you can determine the optimal
revenue figures ri , for i  = 1, 2, …, 10, by inspection, with the corresponding
optimal decompositions
Page number: 442
r 1  = 1 from solution 1 = 1 (no cuts),
r 2  = 5 from solution 2 = 2 (no cuts),
r 3  = 8 from solution 3 = 3 (no cuts),
r 4  = 10 from solution 4 = 2 + 2,
r 5  = 13 from solution 5 = 2 + 3,
r 6  = 17 from solution 6 = 6 (no cuts),
r 7  = 18 from solution 7 = 1 + 6 or 7 = 2 + 2 + 3,
r 8  = 22 from solution 8 = 2 + 6,
r 9  = 25 from solution 9 = 3 + 6,
r 10  = 30 from solution 10 = 10 (no cuts).
More generally , we can express the values rn  for n  ≥ 1 in terms of
optimal revenues from shorter rods:
The first ar gument, pn , corresponds to making no cuts at all and selling the
rod of length n  as is. The other n  − 1 ar guments to max correspond to the
maximum revenue obtained by making an initial cut of the rod into two
pieces of size i  and n  − i , for each i  = 1, 2, …, n  − 1, and then optimally
cutting up those pieces further , obtaining revenues ri  and rn − i  from those
two pieces. Since you don’ t know ahead of time which value of i  optimizes
revenue, you have to consider all possible values for i  and pick the one that
maximizes revenue. Y ou also have the option of picking no i  at all if the
greatest revenue comes from selling the rod uncut.
T o solve the original problem of size n , you solve smaller problems of
the same type. Once you make the first cut, the two resulting pieces form
independent instances of the rod-cutting problem. The overall optimal
solution incorporates optimal solutions to the two resulting subproblems,
maximizing revenue from each of those two pieces. W e say that the rod-
cutting problem exhibits optimal substructure : optimal solutions to a
problem incorporate optimal solutions to related subproblems, which you
may solve independently .
In a related, but slightly simpler , way to arrange a recursive structure for
the rod-cutting problem, let’ s view a decomposition as consisting of a first
piece of length i  cut of f the left-hand end, and then a right-hand remainder
of length n  − i . Only the remainder , and not the first piece, may be further
Page number: 443
divided. Think of every decomposition of a length- n  rod in this way: as a
first piece followed by some decomposition of the remainder . Then we can
express the solution with no cuts at all by saying that the first piece has size
i  = n  and revenue pn  and that the remainder has size 0 with corresponding
revenue r0  = 0. W e thus obtain the following simpler version of equation
(14.1):
In this formulation, an optimal solution embodies the solution to only one
related subproblem—the remainder—rather than two.
Recursive top-down implementation
The C UT -R OD  procedure on the following page implements the computation
implicit in equation (14.2) in a straightforward, top-down, recursive
manner . It takes as input an array p [1 : n ] of prices and an integer n , and it
returns the maximum revenue possible for a rod of length n . For length n  =
0, no revenue is possible, and so C UT -R OD  returns 0 in line 2. Line 3
initializes the maximum revenue q  to −∞, so that the for  loop in lines 4–5
correctly computes q  = max { pi  + C UT -R OD ( p , n  − i ) : 1 ≤ i  ≤ n }. Line 6
then returns this value. A simple induction on n  proves that this answer is
equal to the desired answer rn , using equation (14.2).
C UT -R OD ( p , n )
1 if  n  == 0
2 r eturn  0
3 q  = −∞
4 for  i  = 1 to  n
5 q  = max { q , p [ i ] + C UT -R OD ( p , n  − i )}
6 r eturn  q
If you code up C UT -R OD  in your favorite programming language and run
it on your computer , you’ll find that once the input size becomes
moderately lar ge, your program takes a long time to run. For n  = 40, your
program may take several minutes and possibly more than an hour . For
lar ge values of n , you’ll also discover that each time you increase n  by 1,
your program’ s running time approximately doubles.
Page number: 444
Why is C UT -R OD  so inef ficient? The problem is that C UT -R OD  calls itself
recursively over and over again with the same parameter values, which
means that it solves the same subproblems repeatedly . Figure 14.3  shows a
recursion tree demonstrating what happens for n  = 4: C UT -R OD ( p , n ) calls
C UT -R OD ( p , n  − i ) for i  = 1, 2, …, n . Equivalently , C UT -R OD ( p , n ) calls
C UT -R OD ( p , j ) for each j  = 0, 1, …, n  − 1. When this process unfolds
recursively , the amount of work done, as a function of n , grows explosively .
T o analyze the running time of C UT -R OD , let T ( n ) denote the total
number of calls made to C UT -R OD ( p , n ) for a particular value of n . This
expression equals the number of nodes in a subtree whose root is labeled n
in the recursion tree. The count includes the initial call at its root. Thus,
T (0) = 1 and
The initial 1 is for the call at the root, and the term T ( j ) counts the number
of calls (including recursive calls) due to the call C UT -R OD ( p , n  − i ), where j
= n  − i . As Exercise 14.1-1 asks you to show ,
and so the running time of C UT -R OD  is exponential in n .
In retrospect, this exponential running time is not so surprising. C UT -
R OD  explicitly considers all possible ways of cutting up a rod of length n .
How many ways are there? A rod of length n  has n  − 1 potential locations
to cut. Each possible way to cut up the rod makes a cut at some subset of
these n  − 1 locations, including the empty set, which makes for no cuts.
V iewing each cut location as a distinct member of a set of n  − 1 elements,
you can see that there are 2n −1 subsets. Each leaf in the recursion tree of
Figure 14.3  corresponds to one possible way to cut up the rod. Hence, the
recursion tree has 2n −1 leaves. The labels on the simple path from the root to
a leaf give the sizes of each remaining right-hand piece before making each
cut. That is, the labels give the corresponding cut points, measured from the
right-hand end of the rod.
Page number: 445
Figur e 14.3  The recursion tree showing recursive calls resulting from a call C UT -R OD ( p , n ) for n  =
4. Each node label gives the size n  of the corresponding subproblem, so that an edge from a parent
with label s  to a child with label t  corresponds to cutting of f an initial piece of size s  − t  and leaving a
remaining subproblem of size t . A path from the root to a leaf corresponds to one of the 2n −1 ways of
cutting up a rod of length n . In general, this recursion tree has 2n nodes and 2n −1 leaves.
Using dynamic pr ogramming for optimal r od cutting
Now , let’ s see how to use dynamic programming to convert C UT -R OD  into
an ef ficient algorithm.
The dynamic-programming method works as follows. Instead of solving
the same subproblems repeatedly , as in the naive recursion solution, arrange
for each subproblem to be solved only once . There’ s actually an obvious
way to do so: the first time you solve a subproblem, save its solution . If you
need to refer to this subproblem’ s solution again later , just look it up, rather
than recomputing it.
Saving subproblem solutions comes with a cost: the additional memory
needed to store solutions. Dynamic programming thus serves as an example
of a time-memory trade-of f . The savings may be dramatic. For example,
we’re about to use dynamic programming to go from the exponential-time
algorithm for rod cutting down to a Θ( n2)-time algorithm. A dynamic-
programming approach runs in polynomial time when the number of
distinct  subproblems involved is polynomial in the input size and you can
solve each such subproblem in polynomial time.
There are usually two equivalent ways to implement a dynamic-
programming approach. Solutions to the rod-cutting problem illustrate both
of them.
Page number: 446
The first approach is top-down  with memoization .2 In this approach,
you write the procedure recursively in a natural manner , but modified to
save the result of each subproblem (usually in an array or hash table). The
procedure now first checks to see whether it has previously solved this
subproblem. If so, it returns the saved value, saving further computation at
this level. If not, the procedure computes the value in the usual manner but
also saves it. W e say that the recursive procedure has been memoized : it
“remembers” what results it has computed previously .
The second approach is the bottom-up method . This approach typically
depends on some natural notion of the “size” of a subproblem, such that
solving any particular subproblem depends only on solving “smaller”
subproblems. Solve the subproblems in size order , smallest first, storing the
solution to each subproblem when it is first solved. In this way , when
solving a particular subproblem, there are already saved solutions for all of
the smaller subproblems its solution depends upon. Y ou need to solve each
subproblem only once, and when you first see it, you have already solved
all of its prerequisite subproblems.
These two approaches yield algorithms with the same asymptotic
running time, except in unusual circumstances where the top-down
approach does not actually recurse to examine all possible subproblems.
The bottom-up approach often has much better constant factors, since it has
lower overhead for procedure calls.
The procedures M EMOIZED -C UT -R OD  and M EMOIZED -C UT -R OD -A UX  on
the facing page demonstrate how to memoize the top-down C UT -R OD
procedure. The main procedure M EMOIZED -C UT -R OD  initializes a new
auxiliary array r [0 : n ] with the value −∞ which, since known revenue
values are always nonnegative, is a convenient choice for denoting
“unknown.” M EMOIZED -C UT -R OD  then calls its helper procedure,
M EMOIZED -C UT -R OD -A UX , which is just the memoized version of the
exponential-time procedure, C UT -R OD . It first checks in line 1 to see
whether the desired value is already known and, if it is, then line 2 returns
it. Otherwise, lines 3–7 compute the desired value q  in the usual manner ,
line 8 saves it in r [ n ], and line 9 returns it.
The bottom-up version, B OTT OM -U P -C UT -R OD  on the next page, is even
simpler . Using the bottom-up dynamic-programming approach, B OTT OM -
U P -C UT -R OD  takes advantage of the natural ordering of the subproblems: a
Page number: 447
subproblem of size i  is “smaller” than a subproblem of size j  if i  < j . Thus,
the procedure solves subproblems of sizes j  = 0, 1, …, n , in that order .
M EMOIZED -C UT -R OD ( p , n )
1 let r [0 : n ] be a new array //  will remember solution values in r
2 for  i  = 0 to  n
3 r [ i ] = −∞
4 r eturn  M EMOIZED -C UT -R OD -A UX ( p , n , r )
M EMOIZED -C UT -R OD -A UX ( p , n , r )
1 if  r [ n ] ≥ 0 //  already have a solution for length n ?
2 r eturn  r [ n ]
3 if  n  == 0
4 q  = 0
5 else  q  = −∞
6 for  i  = 1 to  n //  i  is the position of the first cut
7 q  = max { q , p [ i ] + M EMOIZED -C UT -R OD -A UX ( p , n  − i , r )}
8 r [ n ] = q //  remember the solution value for length n
9 r eturn  q
B OTT OM -U P -C UT -R OD ( p , n )
1 let r [0 : n ] be a new array //  will remember solution values in r
2 r [0] = 0
3 for  j  = 1 to  n //  for increasing rod length j
4 q  = −∞
5 for  i  = 1 to  j //  i  is the position of the first cut
6 q  = max { q , p [ i ] + r [ j  − i ]}
7 r [ j ] = q //  remember the solution value for length j
8 r eturn  r [ n ]
Line 1 of B OTT OM -U P -C UT -R OD  creates a new array r [0 : n ] in which to
save the results of the subproblems, and line 2 initializes r [0] to 0, since a
rod of length 0 earns no revenue. Lines 3–6 solve each subproblem of size j ,
for j  = 1, 2, …, n , in order of increasing size. The approach used to solve a
problem of a particular size j  is the same as that used by C UT -R OD , except
that line 6 now directly references array entry r [ j  − i ] instead of making a
recursive call to solve the subproblem of size j  − i . Line 7 saves in r [ j ] the
solution to the subproblem of size j . Finally , line 8 returns r [ n ], which
equals the optimal value rn .
The bottom-up and top-down versions have the same asymptotic
running time. The running time of B OTT OM -U P -C UT -R OD  is Θ( n2), due to its
doubly nested loop structure. The number of iterations of its inner for  loop,
Page number: 448
in lines 5–6, forms an arithmetic series. The running time of its top-down
counterpart, M EMOIZED C UT -R OD , is also Θ( n2), although this running time
may be a little harder to see. Because a recursive call to solve a previously
solved subproblem returns immediately , M EMOIZED -C UT -R OD  solves each
subproblem just once. It solves subproblems for sizes 0, 1, …, n . T o solve a
subproblem of size n , the for  loop of lines 6–7 iterates n  times. Thus, the
total number of iterations of this for  loop, over all recursive calls of
M EMOIZED -C UT -R OD , forms an arithmetic series, giving a total of Θ( n2)
iterations, just like the inner for  loop of B OTT OM -U P -C UT -R OD . (W e actually
are using a form of aggregate analysis here. W e’ll see aggregate analysis in
detail in Section 16.1 .)
Figur e 14.4  The subproblem graph for the rod-cutting problem with n  = 4. The vertex labels give the
sizes of the corresponding subproblems. A directed edge ( x , y ) indicates that solving subproblem x
requires a solution to subproblem y . This graph is a reduced version of the recursion tree of Figure
14.3 , in which all nodes with the same label are collapsed into a single vertex and all edges go from
parent to child.
Subpr oblem graphs
When you think about a dynamic-programming problem, you need to
understand the set of subproblems involved and how subproblems depend
on one another .
The subproblem graph  for the problem embodies exactly this
information. Figure 14.4  shows the subproblem graph for the rod-cutting
problem with n  = 4. It is a directed graph, containing one vertex for each
distinct subproblem. The subproblem graph has a directed edge from the
vertex for subproblem x  to the vertex for subproblem y  if determining an
Page number: 449
optimal solution for subproblem x  involves directly considering an optimal
solution for subproblem y . For example, the subproblem graph contains an
edge from x  to y  if a top-down recursive procedure for solving x  directly
calls itself to solve y . Y ou can think of the subproblem graph as a “reduced”
or “collapsed” version of the recursion tree for the top-down recursive
method, with all nodes for the same subproblem coalesced into a single
vertex and all edges directed from parent to child.
The bottom-up method for dynamic programming considers the vertices
of the subproblem graph in such an order that you solve the subproblems y
adjacent to a given subproblem x  before you solve subproblem x . (As
Section B.4  notes, the adjacency relation in a directed graph is not
necessarily symmetric.) Using terminology that we’ll see in Section 20.4 , in
a bottom-up dynamic-programming algorithm, you consider the vertices of
the subproblem graph in an order that is a “reverse topological sort,” or a
“topological sort of the transpose” of the subproblem graph. In other words,
no subproblem is considered until all of the subproblems it depends upon
have been solved. Similarly , using notions that we’ll visit in Section 20.3 ,
you can view the top-down method (with memoization) for dynamic
programming as a “depth-first search” of the subproblem graph.
The size of the subproblem graph G  = ( V , E ) can help you determine the
running time of the dynamic-programming algorithm. Since you solve each
subproblem just once, the running time is the sum of the times needed to
solve each subproblem. T ypically , the time to compute the solution to a
subproblem is proportional to the degree (number of outgoing edges) of the
corresponding vertex in the subproblem graph, and the number of
subproblems is equal to the number of vertices in the subproblem graph. In
this common case, the running time of dynamic programming is linear in
the number of vertices and edges.
Reconstructing a solution
The procedures M EMOIZED -C UT -R OD  and B OTT OM -U P -C UT -R OD  return the
value  of an optimal solution to the rod-cutting problem, but they do not
return the solution itself : a list of piece sizes.
Let’ s see how to extend the dynamic-programming approach to record
not only the optimal value  computed for each subproblem, but also a choice
that led to the optimal value. W ith this information, you can readily print an
optimal solution. The procedure E XTENDED -B OTT OM -U P -C UT -R OD  on the
Page number: 450
next page computes, for each rod size j , not only the maximum revenue rj ,
but also sj , the optimal size of the first piece to cut of f. It’ s similar to
B OTT OM -U P -C UT -R OD , except that it creates the array s  in line 1, and it
updates s [ j ] in line 8 to hold the optimal size i  of the first piece to cut of f
when solving a subproblem of size j .
The procedure P RINT -C UT -R OD -S OLUTION  on the following page takes as
input an array p [1 : n ] of prices and a rod size n . It calls E XTENDED -
B OTT OM -U P -C UT -R OD  to compute the array s [1 : n ] of optimal first-piece
sizes. Then it prints out the complete list of piece sizes in an optimal
decomposition of a rod of length n . For the sample price chart appearing in
Figure 14.1 , the call E XTENDED -B OTT OM -U P -C UT -R OD ( p , 10) returns the
following arrays:
i 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
r [ i ] 0 1 5 8 10 13 17 18 22 25 30
s [ i ] 1 2 3 2 2 6 1 2 3 10
A call to P RINT -C UT -R OD -S OLUTION ( p , 10) prints just 10, but a call with n  =
7 prints the cuts 1 and 6, which correspond to the first optimal
decomposition for r7  given earlier .
E XTENDED -B OTT OM -U P -C UT -R OD ( p , n )
  1 let r [0 : n ] and s [1 : n ] be new arrays
  2 r [0] = 0
  3 for  j  = 1 to  n //  for increasing rod length j
  4 q  = −∞
  5 for  i  = 1 to  j //  i  is the position of the first cut
  6 if  q  < p [ i ] + r [ j  − i ]
  7 q  = p [ i ] + r [ j  − i ]
  8 s [ j ] = i //  best cut location so far for length j
  9 r [ j ] = q //  remember the solution value for length j
10 r eturn  r  and s
P RINT -C UT -R OD -S OLUTION ( p , n )
1 ( r , s ) = E XTENDED -B OTT OM -U P -C UT -R OD ( p , n )
2 while  n  > 0
3 print s [ n ] //  cut location for length n
4 n  = n  − s [ n ] //  length of the remainder of the rod
Exer cises
14.1-1
Page number: 451
Show that equation (14.4) follows from equation (14.3) and the initial
condition T (0) = 1.
14.1-2
Show , by means of a counterexample, that the following “greedy” strategy
does not always determine an optimal way to cut rods. Define the density  of
a rod of length i  to be pi / i , that is, its value per inch. The greedy strategy for
a rod of length n  cuts of f a first piece of length i , where 1 ≤ i  ≤ n , having
maximum density . It then continues by applying the greedy strategy to the
remaining piece of length n  − i .
14.1-3
Consider a modification of the rod-cutting problem in which, in addition to
a price pi  for each rod, each cut incurs a fixed cost of c . The revenue
associated with a solution is now the sum of the prices of the pieces minus
the costs of making the cuts. Give a dynamic-programming algorithm to
solve this modified problem.
14.1-4
Modify C UT -R OD  and M EMOIZED -C UT -R OD -A UX  so that their for  loops go
up to only ⌊ n /2 ⌋ , rather than up to n . What other changes to the procedures
do you need to make? How are their running times af fected?
14.1-5
Modify M EMOIZED -C UT -R OD  to return not only the value but the actual
solution.
14.1-6
The Fibonacci numbers are defined by recurrence (3.31) on page 69. Give
an O ( n )-time dynamic-programming algorithm to compute the n th
Fibonacci number . Draw the subproblem graph. How many vertices and
edges does the graph contain?
14.2    Matrix-chain multiplication
Our next example of dynamic programming is an algorithm that solves the
problem of matrix-chain multiplication. Given a sequence (chain) 〈 A1 , A2 ,
Page number: 452
…, An〉  of n  matrices to be multiplied, where the matrices aren’ t necessarily
square, the goal is to compute the product
using the standard algorithm3 for multiplying rectangular matrices, which
we’ll see in a moment, while minimizing the number of scalar
multiplications.
Y ou can evaluate the expression (14.5) using the algorithm for
multiplying pairs of rectangular matrices as a subroutine once you have
parenthesized it to resolve all ambiguities in how the matrices are
multiplied together . Matrix multiplication is associative, and so all
parenthesizations yield the same product. A product of matrices is fully
parenthesized  if it is either a single matrix or the product of two fully
parenthesized matrix products, surrounded by parentheses. For example, if
the chain of matrices is 〈 A1 , A2 , A3 , A4〉 , then you can fully parenthesize the
product A1 A2 A3 A4  in five distinct ways:
( A 1 ( A 2 ( A 3 A 4 ))),
( A 1 (( A 2 A 3 ) A 4 )),
(( A 1 A 2 )( A 3 A 4 )),
(( A 1 ( A 2 A 3 )) A 4 ),
((( A 1 A 2 ) A 3 ) A 4 ).
How you parenthesize a chain of matrices can have a dramatic impact
on the cost of evaluating the product. Consider first the cost of multiplying
two rectangular matrices. The standard algorithm is given by the procedure
R ECT ANGULAR -M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y , which generalizes the square-matrix
multiplication procedure M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y  on page 81. The R ECT ANGULAR -
M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y  procedure computes C  = C  + A  · B  for three matrices A  =
( aij ), B  = ( bij ), and C  = ( cij ), where A  is p  × q , B  is q  × r , and C  is p  × r .
R ECT ANGULAR -M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y ( A , B , C , p , q , r )
1 for  i  = 1 to  p
2 for  j  = 1 to  r
3 for  k  = 1 to  q
4 c ij  = c ij  + a ik  · b kj
Page number: 453
The running time of R ECT ANGULAR -M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y  is dominated by
the number of scalar multiplications in line 4, which is pqr . Therefore, we’ll
consider the cost of multiplying matrices to be the number of scalar
multiplications. (The number of scalar multiplications dominates even if we
consider initializing C  = 0 to perform just C  = A  · B .)
T o illustrate the dif ferent costs incurred by dif ferent parenthesizations of
a matrix product, consider the problem of a chain 〈 A1 , A2 , A3〉  of three
matrices. Suppose that the dimensions of the matrices are 10 × 100, 100 ×
5, and 5 × 50, respectively . Multiplying according to the parenthesization
(( A1 A2 ) A3 ) performs 10 · 100 · 5 = 5000 scalar multiplications to compute
the 10 × 5 matrix product A1 A2 , plus another 10 · 5 · 50 = 2500 scalar
multiplications to multiply this matrix by A3 , for a total of 7500 scalar
multiplications. Multiplying according to the alternative parenthesization
( A1 ( A2 A3 )) performs 100 · 5 · 50 = 25,000 scalar multiplications to compute
the 100 × 50 matrix product A2 A3 , plus another 10 · 100 · 50 = 50,000 scalar
multiplications to multiply A1  by this matrix, for a total of 75,000 scalar
multiplications. Thus, computing the product according to the first
parenthesization is 10 times faster .
W e state the matrix-chain multiplication problem  as follows: given a
chain 〈 A1 , A2 , …, An〉  of n  matrices, where for i  = 1, 2, …, n , matrix Ai  has
dimension pi −1  × pi , fully parenthesize the product A1 A2  ⋯  An  in a way that
minimizes the number of scalar multiplications. The input is the sequence
of dimensions 〈 p0 , p1 , p2 , …, pn〉 .
The matrix-chain multiplication problem does not entail actually
multiplying matrices. The goal is only to determine an order for multiplying
matrices that has the lowest cost. T ypically , the time invested in
determining this optimal order is more than paid for by the time saved later
on when actually performing the matrix multiplications (such as performing
only 7500 scalar multiplications instead of 75,000).
Counting the number of par enthesizations
Before solving the matrix-chain multiplication problem by dynamic
programming, let us convince ourselves that exhaustively checking all
possible parenthesizations is not an ef ficient algorithm. Denote the number
of alternative parenthesizations of a sequence of n  matrices by P ( n ). When
Page number: 454
n  = 1, the sequence consists of just one matrix, and therefore there is only
one way to fully parenthesize the matrix product. When n  ≥ 2, a fully
parenthesized matrix product is the product of two fully parenthesized
matrix subproducts, and the split between the two subproducts may occur
between the k th and ( k  + 1)st matrices for any k  = 1, 2, …, n  − 1. Thus, we
obtain the recurrence
Problem 12-4 on page 329 asked you to show that the solution to a similar
recurrence is the sequence of Catalan numbers , which grows as Ω(4n/ n3/2).
A simpler exercise (see Exercise 14.2-3) is to show that the solution to the
recurrence (14.6) is Ω(2n). The number of solutions is thus exponential in n ,
and the brute-force method of exhaustive search makes for a poor strategy
when determining how to optimally parenthesize a matrix chain.
Applying dynamic pr ogramming
Let’ s use the dynamic-programming method to determine how to optimally
parenthesize a matrix chain, by following the four -step sequence that we
stated at the beginning of this chapter:
1 . Characterize the structure of an optimal solution.
2 . Recursively define the value of an optimal solution.
3 . Compute the value of an optimal solution.
4 . Construct an optimal solution from computed information.
W e’ll go through these steps in order , demonstrating how to apply each step
to the problem.
Step 1: The structur e of an optimal par enthesization
In the first step of the dynamic-programming method, you find the optimal
substructure and then use it to construct an optimal solution to the problem
from optimal solutions to subproblems. T o perform this step for the matrix-
chain multiplication problem, it’ s convenient to first introduce some
Page number: 455
notation. Let Ai : j , where i  ≤ j , denote the matrix that results from evaluating
the product Ai Ai +1  ⋯  Aj . If the problem is nontrivial, that is, i  < j , then to
parenthesize the product Ai Ai +1  ⋯  Aj , the product must split between Ak  and
Ak +1  for some integer k  in the range i  ≤ k  < j . That is, for some value of k ,
first compute the matrices Ai : k  and Ak +1: j , and then multiply them together to
produce the final product Ai : j . The cost of parenthesizing this way is the cost
of computing the matrix Ai : k , plus the cost of computing Ak +1: j , plus the cost
of multiplying them together .
The optimal substructure of this problem is as follows. Suppose that to
optimally parenthesize Ai Ai +1  ⋯  Aj , you split the product between Ak  and
Ak +1 . Then the way you parenthesize the “prefix” subchain Ai Ai +1  ⋯  Ak
within this optimal parenthesization of Ai Ai +1  ⋯  Aj  must be an optimal
parenthesization of Ai Ai +1  ⋯  Ak . Why? If there were a less costly way to
parenthesize Ai Ai +1  ⋯  Ak , then you could substitute that parenthesization in
the optimal parenthesization of Ai Ai +1  ⋯  Aj  to produce another way to
parenthesize Ai Ai +1  ⋯  Aj  whose cost is lower than the optimum: a
contradiction. A similar observation holds for how to parenthesize the
subchain Ak +1 Ak +2  ⋯  Aj  in the optimal parenthesization of Ai Ai +1  ⋯  Aj : it
must be an optimal parenthesization of Ak +1 Ak +2  ⋯  Aj .
Now let’ s use the optimal substructure to show how to construct an
optimal solution to the problem from optimal solutions to subproblems.
Any solution to a nontrivial instance of the matrix-chain multiplication
problem requires splitting the product, and any optimal solution contains
within it optimal solutions to subproblem instances. Thus, to build an
optimal solution to an instance of the matrix-chain multiplication problem,
split the problem into two subproblems (optimally parenthesizing Ai Ai +1  ⋯
Ak  and Ak +1 Ak +2  ⋯  Aj ), find optimal solutions to the two subproblem
instances, and then combine these optimal subproblem solutions. T o ensure
that you’ve examined the optimal split, you must consider all possible
splits.
Step 2: A r ecursive solution
Page number: 456
The next step is to define the cost of an optimal solution recursively in
terms of the optimal solutions to subproblems. For the matrix-chain
multiplication problem, a subproblem is to determine the minimum cost of
parenthesizing Ai Ai +1  ⋯  Aj  for 1 ≤ i  ≤ j  ≤ n . Given the input dimensions 〈 p0 ,
p1 , p2 , …, pn〉 , an index pair i , j  specifies a subproblem. Let m [ i , j ] be the
minimum number of scalar multiplications needed to compute the matrix
Ai : j . For the full problem, the lowest-cost way to compute A1: n  is thus m [1,
n ].
W e can define m [ i , j ] recursively as follows. If i  = j , the problem is
trivial: the chain consists of just one matrix Ai : i  = Ai , so that no scalar
multiplications are necessary to compute the product. Thus, m [ i , i ] = 0 for i
= 1, 2, …, n . T o compute m [ i , j ] when i  < j , we take advantage of the
structure of an optimal solution from step 1. Suppose that an optimal
parenthesization splits the product Ai Ai +1  ⋯  Aj  between Ak  and Ak +1 , where
i  ≤ k  < j . Then, m [ i , j ] equals the minimum cost m [ i , k ] for computing the
subproduct Ai : k , plus the minimum cost m [ k +1, j ] for computing the
subproduct, Ak +1: j , plus the cost of multiplying these two matrices together .
Because each matrix Ai  is pi −1  × pi , computing the matrix product Ai : k Ak +1: j
takes pi −1  pk  pj  scalar multiplications. Thus, we obtain
m [ i , j ] = m [ i , k ] + m [ k  + 1, j ] + pi −1  pk  pj .
This recursive equation assumes that you know the value of k . But you
don’ t, at least not yet. Y ou have to try all possible values of k . How many
are there? Just j  − i , namely k  = i , i  + 1, …, j  − 1. Since the optimal
parenthesization must use one of these values for k , you need only check
them all to find the best. Thus, the recursive definition for the minimum
cost of parenthesizing the product Ai Ai +1  ⋯  Aj  becomes
The m [ i , j ] values give the costs of optimal solutions to subproblems, but
they do not provide all the information you need to construct an optimal
solution. T o help you do so, let’ s define s [ i , j ] to be a value of k  at which
Page number: 457
you split the product Ai Ai +1  ⋯  Aj  in an optimal parenthesization. That is,
s [ i , j ] equals a value k  such that m [ i , j ] = m [ i , k ] + m [ k  + 1, j ] + pi −1  pk  pj .
Step 3: Computing the optimal costs
At this point, you could write a recursive algorithm based on recurrence
(14.7) to compute the minimum cost m [1, n ] for multiplying A1 A2  ⋯  An .
But as we saw for the rod-cutting problem, and as we shall see in Section
14.3 , this recursive algorithm takes exponential time. That’ s no better than
the brute-force method of checking each way of parenthesizing the product.
Fortunately , there aren’ t all that many distinct subproblems: just one
subproblem for each choice of i  and j  satisfying 1 ≤ i  ≤ j  ≤ n , or 
 in all.4 A recursive algorithm may encounter each
subproblem many times in dif ferent branches of its recursion tree. This
property of overlapping subproblems is the second hallmark of when
dynamic programming applies (the first hallmark being optimal
substructure).
Instead of computing the solution to recurrence (14.7) recursively , let’ s
compute the optimal cost by using a tabular , bottom-up approach, as in the
procedure M A TRIX -C HAIN -O RDER . (The corresponding top-down approach
using memoization appears in Section 14.3 .) The input is a sequence p  =
〈 p0 , p1 , …, pn〉  of matrix dimensions, along with n , so that for i  = 1, 2, …, n ,
matrix Ai  has dimensions pi −1  × pi . The procedure uses an auxiliary table
m [1 : n , 1 : n ] to store the m [ i , j ] costs and another auxiliary table s [1 : n  −
1, 2 : n ] that records which index k  achieved the optimal cost in computing
m [ i , j ]. The table s  will help in constructing an optimal solution.
M A TRIX -C HAIN -O RDER ( p , n )
  1 let m [1 : n , 1 : n ] and s [1 : n  − 1, 2 : n ] be new tables
  2 for  i  = 1 to  n //  chain length 1
  3 m [ i , i ] = 0
  4 for  l  = 2 to  n //  l  is the chain length
  5 for  i  = 1 to  n  − l  + 1 //  chain begins at A i
  6 j  = i  + l  − 1 //  chain ends at A j
  7 m [ i , j ] = ∞
  8 for  k  = i  to  j  − 1 //  try A i : k A k +1: j
  9 q  = m [ i , k ] + m [ k  + 1, j ] + p i −1 p k  p j
10 if  q  < m [ i , j ]
Page number: 458
1 1 m [ i , j ] = q //  remember this cost
12 s [ i , j ] = k //  remember this index
13 r eturn  m  and s
In what order should the algorithm fill in the table entries? T o answer
this question, let’ s see which entries of the table need to be accessed when
computing the cost m [ i , j ]. Equation (14.7) tells us that to compute the cost
of matrix product Ai : j , first the costs of the products Ai : k  and Ak +1: j  need to
have been computed for all k  = i , i  + 1, …, j  − 1. The chain Ai Ai +1  ⋯  Aj
consists of j  − i  + 1 matrices, and the chains Ai Ai +1  … Ak  and Ak +1  Ak +2  …
Aj  consist of k  − i  + 1 and j  − k  matrices, respectively . Since k  < j , a chain of
k  − i  + 1 matrices consists of fewer than j  − i  + 1 matrices. Likewise, since k
≥ i , a chain of j  − k  matrices consists of fewer than j  − i  + 1 matrices. Thus,
the algorithm should fill in the table m  from shorter matrix chains to longer
matrix chains. That is, for the subproblem of optimally parenthesizing the
chain Ai Ai +1  ⋯  Aj , it makes sense to consider the subproblem size as the
length j  − i  + 1 of the chain.
Now , let’ s see how the M A TRIX -C HAIN -O RDER  procedure fills in the m [ i ,
j ] entries in order of increasing chain length. Lines 2–3 initialize m [ i , i ] = 0
for i  = 1, 2, …, n , since any matrix chain with just one matrix requires no
scalar multiplications. In the for  loop of lines 4–12, the loop variable l
denotes the length of matrix chains whose minimum costs are being
computed. Each iteration of this loop uses recurrence (14.7) to compute m [ i ,
i  + l  − 1] for i  = 1, 2, …, n  − l  + 1. In the first iteration, l  = 2, and so the
loop computes m [ i , i  + 1] for i  = 1, 2, …, n  − 1: the minimum costs for
chains of length l  = 2. The second time through the loop, it computes m [ i , i
+ 2] for i  = 1, 2, …, n  − 2: the minimum costs for chains of length l  = 3.
And so on, ending with a single matrix chain of length l  = n  and computing
m [1, n ]. When lines 7–12 compute an m [ i , j ] cost, this cost depends only on
table entries m [ i , k ] and m [ k  + 1, j ], which have already been computed.
Figure 14.5  illustrates the m  and s  tables, as filled in by the M A TRIX -
C HAIN -O RDER  procedure on a chain of n  = 6 matrices. Since m [ i , j ] is
defined only for i  ≤ j , only the portion of the table m  on or above the main
diagonal is used. The figure shows the table rotated to make the main
diagonal run horizontally . The matrix chain is listed along the bottom.
Using this layout, the minimum cost m [ i , j ] for multiplying a subchain
Ai Ai +1  ⋯  Aj  of matrices appears at the intersection of lines running
Page number: 459
northeast from Ai  and northwest from Aj . Reading across, each diagonal in
the table contains the entries for matrix chains of the same length. M A TRIX -
C HAIN -O RDER  computes the rows from bottom to top and from left to right
within each row . It computes each entry m [ i , j ] using the products pi −1  pk  pj
for k  = i , i  + 1, …, j  − 1 and all entries southwest and southeast from m [ i , j ].
A simple inspection of the nested loop structure of M A TRIX -C HAIN -
O RDER  yields a running time of O ( n3) for the algorithm. The loops are
nested three deep, and each loop index ( l , i , and k ) takes on at most n  − 1
values. Exercise 14.2-5 asks you to show that the running time of this
algorithm is in fact also Ω( n3). The algorithm requires Θ( n2) space to store
the m  and s  tables. Thus, M A TRIX -C HAIN -O RDER  is much more ef ficient than
the exponential-time method of enumerating all possible parenthesizations
and checking each one.
Page number: 460
Figur e 14.5  The m  and s  tables computed by M A TRIX -C HAIN -O RDER  for n  = 6 and the following
matrix dimensions:
matrixA 1 A 2 A 3 A 4 A 5 A 6
dimension 30 × 35 35 × 15 15 × 5 5 × 10 10 × 20 20 × 25
The tables are rotated so that the main diagonal runs horizontally . The m  table uses only the main
diagonal and upper triangle, and the s  table uses only the upper triangle. The minimum number of
scalar multiplications to multiply the 6 matrices is m [1, 6] = 15,125. Of the entries that are not tan,
the pairs that have the same color are taken together in line 9 when computing
Step 4: Constructing an optimal solution
Although M A TRIX -C HAIN -O RDER  determines the optimal number of scalar
multiplications needed to compute a matrix-chain product, it does not
directly show how to multiply the matrices. The table s [1 : n  − 1, 2 : n ]
provides the information needed to do so. Each entry s [ i , j ] records a value
of k  such that an optimal parenthesization of Ai Ai +1  ⋯  Aj  splits the product
between Ak  and Ak +1 . The final matrix multiplication in computing A1: n
optimally is A1: s [1, n ] As [1, n ]+1: n . The s  table contains the information needed
to determine the earlier matrix multiplications as well, using recursion: s [1,
s [1, n ]] determines the last matrix multiplication when computing A1: s [1, n ]
Page number: 461
and s [ s [1, n ] + 1, n ] determines the last matrix multiplication when
computing As [1, n ]+1: n . The recursive procedure P RINT -O PTIMAL -P ARENS  on
the facing page prints an optimal parenthesization of the matrix chain
product Ai Ai +1  ⋯  Aj , given the s  table computed by M A TRIX -C HAIN -O RDER
and the indices i  and j . The initial call P RINT -O PTIMAL -P ARENS ( s , 1, n ) prints
an optimal parenthesization of the full matrix chain product A1 A2  ⋯  An . In
the example of Figure 14.5 , the call P RINT -O PTIMAL -P ARENS ( s , 1, 6) prints
the optimal parenthesization (( A1 ( A2 A3 ))(( A4 A5 ) A6 )).
P RINT -O PTIMAL -P ARENS ( s , i , j )
1 if  i  == j
2 print “ A ” i
3 else  print “(”
4 P RINT -O PTIMAL -P ARENS ( s , i , s [ i , j ])
5 P RINT -O PTIMAL -P ARENS ( s , s [ i , j ] + 1, j )
6 print “)”
Exer cises
14.2-1
Find an optimal parenthesization of a matrix-chain product whose sequence
of dimensions is 〈 5, 10, 3, 12, 5, 50, 6 〉 .
14.2-2
Give a recursive algorithm M A TRIX -C HAIN -M UL TIPL Y ( A , s , i , j ) that actually
performs the optimal matrix-chain multiplication, given the sequence of
matrices 〈 A1 , A2 , …, An〉 , the s  table computed by M A TRIX -C HAIN -O RDER ,
and the indices i  and j . (The initial call is M A TRIX -C HAIN -M UL TIPL Y ( A , s , 1,
n ).) Assume that the call R ECT ANGULAR -M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y ( A , B ) returns the
product of matrices A  and B .
14.2-3
Use the substitution method to show that the solution to the recurrence
(14.6) is Ω(2n).
14.2-4
Describe the subproblem graph for matrix-chain multiplication with an
input chain of length n . How many vertices does it have? How many edges
Page number: 462
does it have, and which edges are they?
14.2-5
Let R ( i , j ) be the number of times that table entry m [ i , j ] is referenced while
computing other table entries in a call of M A TRIX -C HAIN -O RDER . Show that
the total number of references for the entire table is
( Hint:  Y ou may find equation (A.4) on page 1 141 useful.)
14.2-6
Show that a full parenthesization of an n -element expression has exactly n  −
1 pairs of parentheses.
14.3    Elements of dynamic pr ogramming
Although you have just seen two complete examples of the dynamic-
programming method, you might still be wondering just when the method
applies. From an engineering perspective, when should you look for a
dynamic-programming solution to a problem? In this section, we’ll examine
the two key ingredients that an optimization problem must have in order for
dynamic programming to apply: optimal substructure and overlapping
subproblems. W e’ll also revisit and discuss more fully how memoization
might help you take advantage of the overlapping-subproblems property in
a top-down recursive approach.
Optimal substructur e
The first step in solving an optimization problem by dynamic programming
is to characterize the structure of an optimal solution. Recall that a problem
exhibits optimal substructure  if an optimal solution to the problem contains
within it optimal solutions to subproblems. When a problem exhibits
optimal substructure, that gives you a good clue that dynamic programming
might apply . (As Chapter 15  discusses, it also might mean that a greedy
strategy applies, however .) Dynamic programming builds an optimal
solution to the problem from optimal solutions to subproblems.
Page number: 463
Consequently , you must take care to ensure that the range of subproblems
you consider includes those used in an optimal solution.
Optimal substructure was key to solving both of the previous problems
in this chapter . In Section 14.1 , we observed that the optimal way of cutting
up a rod of length n  (if Serling Enterprises makes any cuts at all) involves
optimally cutting up the two pieces resulting from the first cut. In Section
14.2 , we noted that an optimal parenthesization of the matrix chain product
Ai Ai +1  ⋯  Aj  that splits the product between Ak  and Ak +1  contains within it
optimal solutions to the problems of parenthesizing Ai Ai +1  ⋯  Ak  and
Ak +1 Ak +2  ⋯  Aj .
Y ou will find yourself following a common pattern in discovering
optimal substructure:
1 . Y ou show that a solution to the problem consists of making a
choice, such as choosing an initial cut in a rod or choosing an index
at which to split the matrix chain. Making this choice leaves one or
more subproblems to be solved.
2 . Y ou suppose that for a given problem, you are given the choice that
leads to an optimal solution. Y ou do not concern yourself yet with
how to determine this choice. Y ou just assume that it has been given
to you.
3 . Given this choice, you determine which subproblems ensue and
how to best characterize the resulting space of subproblems.
4 . Y ou show that the solutions to the subproblems used within an
optimal solution to the problem must themselves be optimal by
using a “cut-and-paste” technique. Y ou do so by supposing that each
of the subproblem solutions is not optimal and then deriving a
contradiction. In particular , by “cutting out” the nonoptimal solution
to each subproblem and “pasting in” the optimal one, you show that
you can get a better solution to the original problem, thus
contradicting your supposition that you already had an optimal
solution. If an optimal solution gives rise to more than one
subproblem, they are typically so similar that you can modify the
cut-and-paste ar gument for one to apply to the others with little
ef fort.
Page number: 464
T o characterize the space of subproblems, a good rule of thumb says to
try to keep the space as simple as possible and then expand it as necessary .
For example, the space of subproblems for the rod-cutting problem
contained the problems of optimally cutting up a rod of length i  for each
size i . This subproblem space worked well, and it was not necessary to try a
more general space of subproblems.
Conversely , suppose that you tried to constrain the subproblem space for
matrix-chain multiplication to matrix products of the form A1 A2  ⋯  Aj . As
before, an optimal parenthesization must split this product between Ak  and
Ak +1  for some 1 ≤ k  < j . Unless you can guarantee that k  always equals j  − 1,
you will find that you have subproblems of the form A1 A2  ⋯  Ak  and
Ak +1 Ak +2  ⋯  Aj . Moreover , the latter subproblem does not have the form
A1 A2  ⋯  Aj . T o solve this problem by dynamic programming, you need to
allow the subproblems to vary at “both ends.” That is, both i  and j  need to
vary in the subproblem of parenthesizing the product Ai Ai +1  ⋯  Aj .
Optimal substructure varies across problem domains in two ways:
1 . how many subproblems an optimal solution to the original problem
uses, and
2 . how many choices you have in determining which subproblem(s) to
use in an optimal solution.
In the rod-cutting problem, an optimal solution for cutting up a rod of size n
uses just one subproblem (of size n  − i ), but we have to consider n  choices
for i  in order to determine which one yields an optimal solution. Matrix-
chain multiplication for the subchain Ai Ai +1  ⋯  Aj  serves an example with
two subproblems and j  − i  choices. For a given matrix Ak  where the product
splits, two subproblems arise—parenthesizing Ai Ai +1  ⋯  Ak  and
parenthesizing Ak +1 Ak +2  ⋯  Aj —and we have to solve both  of them
optimally . Once we determine the optimal solutions to subproblems, we
choose from among j  − i  candidates for the index k .
Informally , the running time of a dynamic-programming algorithm
depends on the product of two factors: the number of subproblems overall
and how many choices you look at for each subproblem. In rod cutting, we
had Θ( n ) subproblems overall, and at most n  choices to examine for each,
Page number: 465
yielding an O ( n2) running time. Matrix-chain multiplication had Θ( n2)
subproblems overall, and each had at most n  − 1 choices, giving an O ( n3)
running time (actually , a Θ( n3) running time, by Exercise 14.2-5).
Usually , the subproblem graph gives an alternative way to perform the
same analysis. Each vertex corresponds to a subproblem, and the choices
for a subproblem are the edges incident from that subproblem. Recall that in
rod cutting, the subproblem graph has n  vertices and at most n  edges per
vertex, yielding an O ( n2) running time. For matrix-chain multiplication, if
you were to draw the subproblem graph, it would have Θ( n2) vertices and
each vertex would have degree at most n  − 1, giving a total of O ( n3)
vertices and edges.
Dynamic programming often uses optimal substructure in a bottom-up
fashion. That is, you first find optimal solutions to subproblems and, having
solved the subproblems, you find an optimal solution to the problem.
Finding an optimal solution to the problem entails making a choice among
subproblems as to which you will use in solving the problem. The cost of
the problem solution is usually the subproblem costs plus a cost that is
directly attributable to the choice itself. In rod cutting, for example, first we
solved the subproblems of determining optimal ways to cut up rods of
length i  for i  = 0, 1, …, n  − 1, and then we determined which of these
subproblems yielded an optimal solution for a rod of length n , using
equation (14.2). The cost attributable to the choice itself is the term pi  in
equation (14.2). In matrix-chain multiplication, we determined optimal
parenthesizations of subchains of Ai Ai +1  ⋯  Aj , and then we chose the matrix
Ak  at which to split the product. The cost attributable to the choice itself is
the term pi −1  pk  pj .
Chapter 15  explores “greedy algorithms,” which have many similarities
to dynamic programming. In particular , problems to which greedy
algorithms apply have optimal substructure. One major dif ference between
greedy algorithms and dynamic programming is that instead of first finding
optimal solutions to subproblems and then making an informed choice,
greedy algorithms first make a “greedy” choice—the choice that looks best
at the time—and then solve a resulting subproblem, without bothering to
solve all possible related smaller subproblems. Surprisingly , in some cases
this strategy works!
Page number: 466
Subtleties
Y ou should be careful not to assume that optimal substructure applies when
it does not. Consider the following two problems whose input consists of a
directed graph G  = ( V , E ) and vertices u , v  ∈  V .
Unweighted shortest path:5 Find a path from u  to v  consisting of the
fewest edges. Such a path must be simple, since removing a cycle from a
path produces a path with fewer edges.
Unweighted longest simple path:  Find a simple path from u  to v
consisting of the most edges. (W ithout the requirement that the path must
be simple, the problem is undefined, since repeatedly traversing a cycle
creates paths with an arbitrarily lar ge number of edges.)
The unweighted shortest-path problem exhibits optimal substructure.
Here’ s how . Suppose that u  ≠ v , so that the problem is nontrivial. Then, any
path p  from u  to v  must contain an intermediate vertex, say w . (Note that w
may be u  or v .) Then, we can decompose the path 
  into subpaths 
. The number of edges in p  equals the number of edges in p1  plus
the number of edges in p2 . W e claim that if p  is an optimal (i.e., shortest)
path from u  to v , then p1  must be a shortest path from u  to w . Why? As
suggested earlier , use a “cut-and-paste” ar gument: if there were another
path, say 
 , from u  to w  with fewer edges than p1 , then we could cut out p1
and paste in 
  to produce a path 
  with fewer edges than p , thus
contradicting p ’ s optimality . Likewise, p2  must be a shortest path from w  to
v . Thus, to find a shortest path from u  to v , consider all intermediate vertices
w , find a shortest path from u  to w  and a shortest path from w  to v , and
choose an intermediate vertex w  that yields the overall shortest path.
Section 23.2  uses a variant of this observation of optimal substructure to
find a shortest path between every pair of vertices on a weighted, directed
graph.
Y ou might be tempted to assume that the problem of finding an
unweighted longest simple path exhibits optimal substructure as well. After
all, if we decompose a longest simple path 
  into subpaths 
 ,
then mustn’ t p1  be a longest simple path from u  to w , and mustn’ t p2  be a
longest simple path from w  to v ? The answer is no! Figure 14.6  supplies an
example. Consider the path q  → r  → t , which is a longest simple path from
Page number: 467
q  to t . Is q  → r  a longest simple path from q  to r ? No, for the path q  → s  →
t  → r  is a simple path that is longer . Is r  → t  a longest simple path from r  to
t ? No again, for the path r  → q  → s  → t  is a simple path that is longer .
Figur e 14.6  A directed graph showing that the problem of finding a longest simple path in an
unweighted directed graph does not have optimal substructure. The path q  → r  → t  is a longest
simple path from q  to t , but the subpath q  → r  is not a longest simple path from q  to r , nor is the
subpath r  → t  a longest simple path from r  to t .
This example shows that for longest simple paths, not only does the
problem lack optimal substructure, but you cannot necessarily assemble a
“legal” solution to the problem from solutions to subproblems. If you
combine the longest simple paths q  → s  → t  → r  and r  → q  → s  → t , you
get the path q  → s  → t  → r  → q  → s  → t , which is not simple. Indeed, the
problem of finding an unweighted longest simple path does not appear to
have any sort of optimal substructure. No ef ficient dynamic-programming
algorithm for this problem has ever been found. In fact, this problem is NP-
complete, which—as we shall see in Chapter 34 —means that we are
unlikely to find a way to solve it in polynomial time.
Why is the substructure of a longest simple path so dif ferent from that of
a shortest path? Although a solution to a problem for both longest and
shortest paths uses two subproblems, the subproblems in finding the longest
simple path are not independent , whereas for shortest paths they are. What
do we mean by subproblems being independent? W e mean that the solution
to one subproblem does not af fect the solution to another subproblem of the
same problem. For the example of Figure 14.6 , we have the problem of
finding a longest simple path from q  to t  with two subproblems: finding
longest simple paths from q  to r  and from r  to t . For the first of these
subproblems, we chose the path q  → s  → t  → r , which used the vertices s
and t . These vertices cannot appear in a solution to the second subproblem,
since the combination of the two solutions to subproblems yields a path that
is not simple. If vertex t  cannot be in the solution to the second problem,
then there is no way to solve it, since t  is required to be on the path that
forms the solution, and it is not the vertex where the subproblem solutions
Page number: 468
are “spliced” together (that vertex being r ). Because vertices s  and t  appear
in one subproblem solution, they cannot appear in the other subproblem
solution. One of them must be in the solution to the other subproblem,
however , and an optimal solution requires both. Thus, we say that these
subproblems are not independent. Looked at another way , using resources
in solving one subproblem (those resources being vertices) renders them
unavailable for the other subproblem.
Why , then, are the subproblems independent for finding a shortest path?
The answer is that by nature, the subproblems do not share resources. W e
claim that if a vertex w  is on a shortest path p  from u  to v , then we can
splice together any  shortest path 
  and any  shortest path 
  to
produce a shortest path from u  to v . W e are assured that, other than w , no
vertex can appear in both paths p1  and p2 . Why? Suppose that some vertex x
≠ w  appears in both p1  and p2 , so that we can decompose p1  as 
and p2  as 
 . By the optimal substructure of this problem, path p
has as many edges as p1  and p2  together . Let’ s say that p  has e  edges. Now
let us construct a path 
  from u  to v . Because we have
excised the paths from x  to w  and from w  to x , each of which contains at
least one edge, path p ′ contains at most e  − 2 edges, which contradicts the
assumption that p  is a shortest path. Thus, we are assured that the
subproblems for the shortest-path problem are independent.
The two problems examined in Sections 14.1  and 14.2  have independent
subproblems. In matrix-chain multiplication, the subproblems are
multiplying subchains Ai Ai +1  ⋯  Ak  and Ak +1 Ak +2  ⋯  Aj . These subchains are
disjoint, so that no matrix could possibly be included in both of them. In rod
cutting, to determine the best way to cut up a rod of length n , we looked at
the best ways of cutting up rods of length i  for i  = 0, 1, …, n  − 1. Because
an optimal solution to the length- n  problem includes just one of these
subproblem solutions (after cutting of f the first piece), independence of
subproblems is not an issue.
Overlapping subpr oblems
The second ingredient that an optimization problem must have for dynamic
programming to apply is that the space of subproblems must be “small” in
the sense that a recursive algorithm for the problem solves the same
subproblems over and over , rather than always generating new
Page number: 469
subproblems. T ypically , the total number of distinct subproblems is a
polynomial in the input size. When a recursive algorithm revisits the same
problem repeatedly , we say that the optimization problem has overlapping
subproblems .6 In contrast, a problem for which a divide-and-conquer
approach is suitable usually generates brand-new problems at each step of
the recursion. Dynamic-programming algorithms typically take advantage
of overlapping subproblems by solving each subproblem once and then
storing the solution in a table where it can be looked up when needed, using
constant time per lookup.
Figur e 14.7  The recursion tree for the computation of R ECURSIVE -M A TRIX -C HAIN ( p , 1, 4). Each
node contains the parameters i  and j . The computations performed in a subtree shaded blue are
replaced by a single table lookup in M EMOIZED -M A TRIX -C HAIN .
In Section 14.1 , we briefly examined how a recursive solution to rod
cutting makes exponentially many calls to find solutions of smaller
subproblems. The dynamic-programming solution reduces the running time
from the exponential time of the recursive algorithm down to quadratic
time.
T o illustrate the overlapping-subproblems property in greater detail, let’ s
revisit the matrix-chain multiplication problem. Referring back to Figure
14.5 , observe that M A TRIX -C HAIN -O RDER  repeatedly looks up the solution to
subproblems in lower rows when solving subproblems in higher rows. For
example, it references entry m [3, 4] four times: during the computations of
m [2, 4], m [1, 4], m [3, 5], and m [3, 6]. If the algorithm were to recompute
m [3, 4] each time, rather than just looking it up, the running time would
increase dramatically . T o see how , consider the inef ficient recursive
procedure R ECURSIVE -M A TRIX -C HAIN  on the facing page, which determines
Page number: 470
m [ i , j ], the minimum number of scalar multiplications needed to compute
the matrix-chain product Ai : j  = Ai Ai +1  ⋯  Aj . The procedure is based directly
on the recurrence (14.7). Figure 14.7  shows the recursion tree produced by
the call R ECURSIVE -M A TRIX -C HAIN ( p , 1, 4). Each node is labeled by the
values of the parameters i  and j . Observe that some pairs of values occur
many times.
In fact, the time to compute m [1, n ] by this recursive procedure is at
least exponential in n . T o see why , let T ( n ) denote the time taken by
R ECURSIVE -M A TRIX -C HAIN  to compute an optimal parenthesization of a
chain of n  matrices. Because the execution of lines 1–2 and of lines 6–7
each take at least unit time, as does the multiplication in line 5, inspection
of the procedure yields the recurrence
R ECURSIVE -M A TRIX -C HAIN ( p , i , j )
1 if  i  == j
2 r eturn  0
3 m [ i , j ] = ∞
4 for  k  = i  to  j  − 1
5 q  = R ECURSIVE -M A TRIX -C HAIN ( p , i , k )
+ R ECURSIVE -M A TRIX -C HAIN ( p , k  + 1, j )
+ p i −1  p k  p j
6 if  q  < m [ i , j ]
7 m [ i , j ] = q
8 r eturn  m [ i , j ]
Noting that for i  = 1, 2, …, n  − 1, each term T ( i ) appears once as T ( k ) and
once as T ( n  − k ), and collecting the n  − 1 1s in the summation together with
the 1 out front, we can rewrite the recurrence as
Let’ s prove that T ( n ) = Ω(2n) using the substitution method. Specifically ,
we’ll show that T ( n ) ≥ 2n −1 for all n  ≥ 1. For the base case n  = 1, the
Page number: 471
summation is empty , and we get T (1) ≥ 1 = 20. Inductively , for n  ≥ 2 we
have
which completes the proof. Thus, the total amount of work performed by
the call R ECURSIVE -M A TRIX -C HAIN ( p , 1, n ) is at least exponential in n .
Compare this top-down, recursive algorithm (without memoization)
with the bottom-up dynamic-programming algorithm. The latter is more
ef ficient because it takes advantage of the overlapping-subproblems
property . Matrix-chain multiplication has only Θ( n2) distinct subproblems,
and the dynamic-programming algorithm solves each exactly once. The
recursive algorithm, on the other hand, must solve each subproblem every
time it reappears in the recursion tree. Whenever a recursion tree for the
natural recursive solution to a problem contains the same subproblem
repeatedly , and the total number of distinct subproblems is small, dynamic
programming can improve ef ficiency , sometimes dramatically .
Reconstructing an optimal solution
As a practical matter , you’ll often want to store in a separate table which
choice you made in each subproblem so that you do not have to reconstruct
this information from the table of costs.
For matrix-chain multiplication, the table s [ i , j ] saves a significant
amount of work when we need to reconstruct an optimal solution. Suppose
that the M A TRIX -C HAIN -O RDER  procedure on page 378 did not maintain the
s [ i , j ] table, so that it filled in only the table m [ i , j ] containing optimal
subproblem costs. The procedure chooses from among j  − i  possibilities
when determining which subproblems to use in an optimal solution to
parenthesizing Ai Ai +1  ⋯  Aj , and j  − i  is not a constant. Therefore, it would
take Θ( j  − i ) = ω (1) time to reconstruct which subproblems it chose for a
Page number: 472
solution to a given problem. Because M A TRIX -C HAIN -O RDER  stores in s [ i , j ]
the index of the matrix at which it split the product Ai Ai +1  ⋯  Aj , the P RINT -
O PTIMAL -P ARENS  procedure on page 381 can look up each choice in O (1)
time.
Memoization
As we saw for the rod-cutting problem, there is an alternative approach to
dynamic programming that often of fers the ef ficiency of the bottom-up
dynamic-programming approach while maintaining a top-down strategy .
The idea is to memoize  the natural, but inef ficient, recursive algorithm. As
in the bottom-up approach, you maintain a table with subproblem solutions,
but the control structure for filling in the table is more like the recursive
algorithm.
A memoized recursive algorithm maintains an entry in a table for the
solution to each subproblem. Each table entry initially contains a special
value to indicate that the entry has yet to be filled in. When the subproblem
is first encountered as the recursive algorithm unfolds, its solution is
computed and then stored in the table. Each subsequent encounter of this
subproblem simply looks up the value stored in the table and returns it.7
The procedure M EMOIZED -M A TRIX -C HAIN  is a memoized version of the
procedure R ECURSIVE -M A TRIX -C HAIN  on page 389. Note where it resembles
the memoized top-down method on page 369 for the rod-cutting problem.
M EMOIZED -M A TRIX -C HAIN ( p , n )
1 let m [1 : n , 1 : n ] be a new table
2 for  i  = 1 to  n
3 for  j  = i  to  n
4 m [ i , j ] = ∞
5 r eturn  L OOKUP -C HAIN ( m , p , 1, n )
L OOKUP -C HAIN ( m , p , i , j )
1 if  m [ i , j ] < ∞
2 r eturn  m [ i , j ]
3 if  i  == j
4 m [ i , j ] = 0
5 else for  k  = i  to  j  − 1
6 q  = L OOKUP -C HAIN ( m , p , i , k )
+ L OOKUP -C HAIN ( m , p , k  + 1, j ) + p i −1  p k  p j
7 if  q  < m [ i , j ]
8 m [ i , j ] = q
Page number: 473
9 r eturn  m [ i , j ]
The M EMOIZED -M A TRIX -C HAIN  procedure, like the bottom-up M A TRIX -
C HAIN -O RDER  procedure on page 378, maintains a table m [1 : n , 1 : n ] of
computed values of m [ i , j ], the minimum number of scalar multiplications
needed to compute the matrix Ai : j . Each table entry initially contains the
value ∞ to indicate that the entry has yet to be filled in. Upon calling
L OOKUP -C HAIN ( m , p , i , j ), if line 1 finds that m [ i , j ] < ∞, then the procedure
simply returns the previously computed cost m [ i , j ] in line 2. Otherwise, the
cost is computed as in R ECURSIVE -M A TRIX -C HAIN , stored in m [ i , j ], and
returned. Thus, L OOKUP -C HAIN ( m , p , i , j ) always returns the value of m [ i , j ],
but it computes it only upon the first call of L OOKUP -C HAIN  with these
specific values of i  and j . Figure 14.7  illustrates how M EMOIZED -M A TRIX -
C HAIN  saves time compared with R ECURSIVE -M A TRIX -C HAIN . Subtrees
shaded blue represent values that are looked up rather than recomputed.
Like the bottom-up procedure M A TRIX -C HAIN -O RDER , the memoized
procedure M EMOIZED -M A TRIX -C HAIN  runs in O ( n3) time. T o begin with, line
4 of M EMOIZED -M A TRIX -C HAIN  executes Θ( n2) times, which dominates the
running time outside of the call to L OOKUP -C HAIN  in line 5. W e can
categorize the calls of L OOKUP -C HAIN  into two types:
1 . calls in which m [ i , j ] = ∞, so that lines 3–9 execute, and
2 . calls in which m [ i , j ] < ∞, so that L OOKUP -C HAIN  simply returns in
line 2.
There are Θ( n2) calls of the first type, one per table entry . All calls of the
second type are made as recursive calls by calls of the first type. Whenever
a given call of L OOKUP -C HAIN  makes recursive calls, it makes O ( n ) of them.
Therefore, there are O ( n3) calls of the second type in all. Each call of the
second type takes O (1) time, and each call of the first type takes O ( n ) time
plus the time spent in its recursive calls. The total time, therefore, is O ( n3).
Memoization thus turns an Ω(2n)-time algorithm into an O ( n3)-time
algorithm.
W e have seen how to solve the matrix-chain multiplication problem by
either a top-down, memoized dynamic-programming algorithm or a bottom-
up dynamic-programming algorithm in O ( n3) time. Both the bottom-up and
memoized methods take advantage of the overlapping-subproblems
Page number: 474
property . There are only Θ( n2) distinct subproblems in total, and either of
these methods computes the solution to each subproblem only once.
W ithout memoization, the natural recursive algorithm runs in exponential
time, since solved subproblems are repeatedly solved.
In general practice, if all subproblems must be solved at least once, a
bottom-up dynamic-programming algorithm usually outperforms the
corresponding top-down memoized algorithm by a constant factor , because
the bottom-up algorithm has no overhead for recursion and less overhead
for maintaining the table. Moreover , for some problems you can exploit the
regular pattern of table accesses in the dynamic-programming algorithm to
reduce time or space requirements even further . On the other hand, in
certain situations, some of the subproblems in the subproblem space might
not need to be solved at all. In that case, the memoized solution has the
advantage of solving only those subproblems that are definitely required.
Exer cises
14.3-1
Which is a more ef ficient way to determine the optimal number of
multiplications in a matrix-chain multiplication problem: enumerating all
the ways of parenthesizing the product and computing the number of
multiplications for each, or running R ECURSIVE -M A TRIX -C HAIN ? Justify your
answer .
14.3-2
Draw the recursion tree for the M ERGE -S OR T  procedure from Section 2.3.1
on an array of 16 elements. Explain why memoization fails to speed up a
good divide-and-conquer algorithm such as M ERGE -S OR T .
14.3-3
Consider the antithetical variant of the matrix-chain multiplication problem
where the goal is to parenthesize the sequence of matrices so as to
maximize, rather than minimize, the number of scalar multiplications. Does
this problem exhibit optimal substructure?
14.3-4
As stated, in dynamic programming, you first solve the subproblems and
then choose which of them to use in an optimal solution to the problem.
Page number: 475
Professor Capulet claims that she does not always need to solve all the
subproblems in order to find an optimal solution. She suggests that she can
find an optimal solution to the matrix-chain multiplication problem by
always choosing the matrix Ak  at which to split the subproduct Ai Ai +1  ⋯  Aj
(by selecting k  to minimize the quantity pi −1  pk  pj ) before solving the
subproblems. Find an instance of the matrix-chain multiplication problem
for which this greedy approach yields a suboptimal solution.
14.3-5
Suppose that the rod-cutting problem of Section 14.1  also had a limit li  on
the number of pieces of length i  allowed to be produced, for i  = 1, 2, …, n .
Show that the optimal-substructure property described in Section 14.1  no
longer holds.
14.4    Longest common subsequence
Biological applications often need to compare the DNA of two (or more)
dif ferent or ganisms. A strand of DNA consists of a string of molecules
called bases , where the possible bases are adenine, cytosine, guanine, and
thymine. Representing each of these bases by its initial letter , we can
express a strand of DNA as a string over the 4-element set { A , C , G , T }.
(See Section C.1  for the definition of a string.) For example, the DNA of
one or ganism may be S1  = ACCGGTCGAGTGCGCGGAAGCCGGCCGAA , and
the DNA of another or ganism may be S2  =
GTCGTTCGGAATGCCGTTGCTCTGTAAA . One reason to compare two
strands of DNA is to determine how “similar” the two strands are, as some
measure of how closely related the two or ganisms are. W e can, and do,
define similarity in many dif ferent ways. For example, we can say that two
DNA strands are similar if one is a substring of the other . ( Chapter 32
explores algorithms to solve this problem.) In our example, neither S1  nor
S2  is a substring of the other . Alternatively , we could say that two strands
are similar if the number of changes needed to turn one into the other is
small. (Problem 14-5 looks at this notion.) Y et another way to measure the
similarity of strands S1  and S2  is by finding a third strand S3  in which the
bases in S3  appear in each of S1  and S2 . These bases must appear in the
Page number: 476
same order , but not necessarily consecutively . The longer the strand S3  we
can find, the more similar S1  and S2  are. In our example, the longest strand
S3  is GTCGTCGGAAGCCGGCCGAA .
W e formalize this last notion of similarity as the longest-common-
subsequence problem. A subsequence of a given sequence is just the given
sequence with 0 or more elements left out. Formally , given a sequence X  =
〈 x1 , x2 , …, xm〉 , another sequence Z  = 〈 z1 , z2 , …, zk〉  is a subsequence  of X  if
there exists a strictly increasing sequence 〈 i1 , i2 , …, ik〉  of indices of X  such
that for all j  = 1, 2, …, k , we have 
 . For example, Z  = 〈 B , C , D , B〉  is
a subsequence of X  = 〈 A , B , C , B , D , A , B〉  with corresponding index
sequence 〈 2, 3, 5, 7 〉 .
Given two sequences X  and Y , we say that a sequence Z  is a common
subsequence  of X  and Y  if Z  is a subsequence of both X  and Y . For example,
if X  = 〈 A , B , C , B , D , A , B〉  and Y  = 〈 B , D , C , A , B , A〉 , the sequence 〈 B , C ,
A〉  is a common subsequence of both X  and Y . The sequence 〈 B , C , A〉  is not
a longest  common subsequence ( LCS ) of X  and Y , however , since it has
length 3 and the sequence 〈 B , C , B , A〉 , which is also common to both
sequences X  and Y , has length 4. The sequence 〈 B , C , B , A〉  is an LCS of X
and Y , as is the sequence 〈 B , D , A , B〉 , since X  and Y  have no common
subsequence of length 5 or greater .
In the longest-common-subsequence problem , the input is two
sequences X  = 〈 x1 , x2 , …, xm〉  and Y  = 〈 y1 , y2 , …, yn〉 , and the goal is to find
a maximum-length common subsequence of X  and Y . This section shows
how to ef ficiently solve the LCS problem using dynamic programming.
Step 1: Characterizing a longest common subsequence
Y ou can solve the LCS problem with a brute-force approach: enumerate all
subsequences of X  and check each subsequence to see whether it is also a
subsequence of Y , keeping track of the longest subsequence you find. Each
subsequence of X  corresponds to a subset of the indices {1, 2, …, m } of X .
Because X  has 2m subsequences, this approach requires exponential time,
making it impractical for long sequences.
The LCS problem has an optimal-substructure property , however , as the
following theorem shows. As we’ll see, the natural classes of subproblems
correspond to pairs of “prefixes” of the two input sequences. T o be precise,
Page number: 477
given a sequence X  = 〈 x1 , x2 , …, xm〉 , we define the i th prefix  of X , for i  = 0,
1, …, m , as Xi  = 〈 x1 , x2 , …, xi〉 . For example, if X  = 〈 A , B , C , B , D , A , B〉 ,
then X4  = 〈 A , B , C , B〉  and X0  is the empty sequence.
Theorem 14.1 (Optimal substructure of an LCS)
Let X  = 〈 x1 , x2 , …, xm〉  and Y  = 〈 y1 , y2 , …, yn〉  be sequences, and let Z  = 〈 z1 ,
z2 , …, zk〉  be any LCS of X  and Y .
1 . If xm  = yn , then zk  = xm  = yn  and Zk −1  is an LCS of Xm −1  and Yn −1 .
2 . If xm  ≠ yn  and zk  ≠ xm , then Z  is an LCS of Xm −1  and Y .
3 . If xm  ≠ yn  and zk  ≠ yn , then Z  is an LCS of X  and Yn −1 .
Proof    (1) If zk  ≠ xm , then we could append xm  = yn  to Z  to obtain a
common subsequence of X  and Y  of length k  + 1, contradicting the
supposition that Z  is a longest  common subsequence of X  and Y . Thus, we
must have zk  = xm  = yn . Now , the prefix Zk −1  is a length-( k  − 1) common
subsequence of Xm −1  and Yn −1 . W e wish to show that it is an LCS. Suppose
for the purpose of contradiction that there exists a common subsequence W
of Xm −1  and Yn −1  with length greater than k  − 1. Then, appending xm  = yn  to
W  produces a common subsequence of X  and Y  whose length is greater than
k , which is a contradiction.
(2) If zk  ≠ xm , then Z  is a common subsequence of Xm −1  and Y . If there
were a common subsequence W  of Xm −1  and Y  with length greater than k ,
then W  would also be a common subsequence of Xm  and Y , contradicting
the assumption that Z  is an LCS of X  and Y .
(3) The proof is symmetric to (2).
▪
The way that Theorem 14.1 characterizes longest common subsequences
says that an LCS of two sequences contains within it an LCS of prefixes of
the two sequences. Thus, the LCS problem has an optimal-substructure
property . A recursive solution also has the overlapping-subproblems
property , as we’ll see in a moment.
Step 2: A r ecursive solution
Page number: 478
Theorem 14.1 implies that you should examine either one or two
subproblems when finding an LCS of X  = 〈 x1 , x2 , …, xm〉  and Y  = 〈 y1 , y2 , …,
yn〉 . If xm  = yn , you need to find an LCS of Xm −1  and Yn −1 . Appending xm  =
yn  to this LCS yields an LCS of X  and Y . If xm  ≠ yn , then you have to solve
two subproblems: finding an LCS of Xm −1  and Y  and finding an LCS of X
and Yn −1 . Whichever of these two LCSs is longer is an LCS of X  and Y .
Because these cases exhaust all possibilities, one of the optimal subproblem
solutions must appear within an LCS of X  and Y .
The LCS problem has the overlapping-subproblems property . Here’ s
how . T o find an LCS of X  and Y , you might need to find the LCSs of X  and
Yn −1  and of Xm −1  and Y . But each of these subproblems has the
subsubproblem of finding an LCS of Xm −1  and Yn −1 . Many other
subproblems share subsubproblems.
As in the matrix-chain multiplication problem, solving the LCS problem
recursively involves establishing a recurrence for the value of an optimal
solution. Let’ s define c [ i , j ] to be the length of an LCS of the sequences Xi
and Yj . If either i  = 0 or j  = 0, one of the sequences has length 0, and so the
LCS has length 0. The optimal substructure of the LCS problem gives the
recursive formula
In this recursive formulation, a condition in the problem restricts which
subproblems to consider . When xi  = yj , you can and should consider the
subproblem of finding an LCS of Xi −1  and Yj −1 . Otherwise, you instead
consider the two subproblems of finding an LCS of Xi  and Yj −1  and of Xi −1
and Yj . In the previous dynamic-programming algorithms we have
examined—for rod cutting and matrix-chain multiplication—we didn’ t rule
out any subproblems due to conditions in the problem. Finding an LCS is
not the only dynamic-programming algorithm that rules out subproblems
based on conditions in the problem. For example, the edit-distance problem
(see Problem 14-5) has this characteristic.
Page number: 479
Step 3: Computing the length of an LCS
Based on equation (14.9), you could write an exponential-time recursive
algorithm to compute the length of an LCS of two sequences. Since the
LCS problem has only Θ( mn ) distinct subproblems (computing c [ i , j ] for 0
≤ i  ≤ m  and 0 ≤ j  ≤ n ), dynamic programming can compute the solutions
bottom up.
The procedure LCS-L ENGTH  on the next page takes two sequences X  =
〈 x1 , x2 , …, xm〉  and Y  = 〈 y1 , y2 , …, yn〉  as inputs, along with their lengths. It
stores the c [ i , j ] values in a table c [0 : m , 0 : n ], and it computes the entries
in row-major  order . That is, the procedure fills in the first row of c  from left
to right, then the second row , and so on. The procedure also maintains the
table b [1 : m , 1 : n ] to help in constructing an optimal solution. Intuitively ,
b [ i , j ] points to the table entry corresponding to the optimal subproblem
solution chosen when computing c [ i , j ]. The procedure returns the b  and c
tables, where c [ m , n ] contains the length of an LCS of X  and Y . Figure 14.8
shows the tables produced by LCS-L ENGTH  on the sequences X  = 〈 A , B , C ,
B , D , A , B〉  and Y  = 〈 B , D , C , A , B , A〉 . The running time of the procedure is
Θ( mn ), since each table entry takes Θ(1) time to compute.
LCS-L ENGTH ( X , Y , m , n )
  1 let b [1 : m , 1 : n ] and c [0 : m , 0 : n ] be new tables
  2 for  i  = 1 to  m
  3 c [ i , 0] = 0
  4 for  j  = 0 to  n
  5 c [0, j ] = 0
  6 for  i  = 1 to  m //  compute table entries in row-major order
  7 for  j  = 1 to  n
  8 if  x i  == y j
  9 c [ i , j ] = c [ i  − 1, j  − 1] + 1
10 b [ i , j ] = “ ↖ ”
1 1 elseif  c [ i  − 1, j ] ≥ c [ i , j  − 1]
12 c [ i , j ] = c [ i  − 1, j ]
13 b [ i , j ] = “↑”
14 else  c [ i , j ] = c [ i , j  − 1]
15 b [ i , j ] = “←”
16 r eturn  c  and b
P RINT -LCS( b , X , i , j )
  1 if  i  == 0 or j  == 0
  2 r eturn //  the LCS has length 0
  3 if  b [ i , j ] == “ ↖ ”
Page number: 480
  4 P RINT -LCS( b , X , i  − 1, j  − 1)
  5 print x i //  same as y j
  6 elseif  b [ i , j ] == “↑”
  7 P RINT -LCS( b , X , i  − 1, j )
  8 else  P RINT -LCS( b , X , i , j  − 1)
Step 4: Constructing an LCS
W ith the b  table returned by LCS-L ENGTH , you can quickly construct an
LCS of X  = 〈 x1 , x2 , …, xm〉  and Y  = 〈 y1 , y2 , …, yn〉 . Begin at b [ m , n ] and
trace through the table by following the arrows. Each “ ↖ ” encountered in
an entry b [ i , j ] implies that xi  = yj  is an element of the LCS that LCS-
L ENGTH  found. This method gives you the elements of this LCS in reverse
order . The recursive procedure P RINT -LCS prints out an LCS of X  and Y  in
the proper , forward order .
Figur e 14.8  The c  and b  tables computed by LCS-L ENGTH  on the sequences X  = 〈 A , B , C , B , D , A ,
B〉  and Y  = 〈 B , D , C , A , B , A〉 . The square in row i  and column j  contains the value of c [ i , j ] and the
appropriate arrow for the value of b [ i , j ]. The entry 4 in c [7, 6]—the lower right-hand corner of the
table—is the length of an LCS 〈 B , C , B , A〉  of X  and Y . For i , j  > 0, entry c [ i , j ] depends only on
whether x i  = y j  and the values in entries c [ i  − 1, j ], c [ i , j  − 1], and c [ i  − 1, j  − 1], which are computed
before c [ i , j ]. T o reconstruct the elements of an LCS, follow the b [ i , j ] arrows from the lower right-
hand corner , as shown by the sequence shaded blue. Each “ ↖ ” on the shaded-blue sequence
corresponds to an entry (highlighted) for which x i  = y j  is a member of an LCS.
Page number: 481
The initial call is P RINT -LCS( b , X , m , n ). For the b  table in Figure 14.8 , this
procedure prints BCBA . The procedure takes O ( m  + n ) time, since it
decrements at least one of i  and j  in each recursive call.
Impr oving the code
Once you have developed an algorithm, you will often find that you can
improve on the time or space it uses. Some changes can simplify the code
and improve constant factors but otherwise yield no asymptotic
improvement in performance. Others can yield substantial asymptotic
savings in time and space.
In the LCS algorithm, for example, you can eliminate the b  table
altogether . Each c [ i , j ] entry depends on only three other c  table entries: c [ i
− 1, j  − 1], c [ i  − 1, j ], and c [ i , j  − 1]. Given the value of c [ i , j ], you can
determine in O (1) time which of these three values was used to compute c [ i ,
j ], without inspecting table b . Thus, you can reconstruct an LCS in O ( m + n )
time using a procedure similar to P RINT -LCS. (Exercise 14.4-2 asks you to
give the pseudocode.) Although this method saves Θ( mn ) space, the
auxiliary space requirement for computing an LCS does not asymptotically
decrease, since the c  table takes Θ( mn ) space anyway .
Y ou can, however , reduce the asymptotic space requirements for LCS-
L ENGTH , since it needs only two rows of table c  at a time: the row being
computed and the previous row . (In fact, as Exercise 14.4-4 asks you to
show , you can use only slightly more than the space for one row of c  to
compute the length of an LCS.) This improvement works if you need only
the length of an LCS. If you need to reconstruct the elements of an LCS, the
smaller table does not keep enough information to retrace the algorithm’ s
steps in O ( m  + n ) time.
Exer cises
14.4-1
Determine an LCS of 〈 1, 0, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1 〉  and 〈 0, 1, 0, 1, 1, 0, 1, 1, 0 〉 .
14.4-2
Give pseudocode to reconstruct an LCS from the completed c  table and the
original sequences X  = 〈 x1 , x2 , …, xm〉  and Y  = 〈 y1 , y2 , …, yn〉  in O ( m  + n )
time, without using the b  table.
Page number: 482
14.4-3
Give a memoized version of LCS-L ENGTH  that runs in O ( mn ) time.
14.4-4
Show how to compute the length of an LCS using only 2 · min { m , n }
entries in the c  table plus O (1) additional space. Then show how to do the
same thing, but using min { m , n } entries plus O (1) additional space.
14.4-5
Give an O ( n2)-time algorithm to find the longest monotonically increasing
subsequence of a sequence of n  numbers.
★  14.4-6
Give an O ( n  lg n )-time algorithm to find the longest monotonically
increasing subsequence of a sequence of n  numbers. ( Hint:  The last element
of a candidate subsequence of length i  is at least as lar ge as the last element
of a candidate subsequence of length i  −1. Maintain candidate subsequences
by linking them through the input sequence.)
14.5    Optimal binary sear ch tr ees
Suppose that you are designing a program to translate text from English to
Latvian. For each occurrence of each English word in the text, you need to
look up its Latvian equivalent. Y ou can perform these lookup operations by
building a binary search tree with n  English words as keys and their Latvian
equivalents as satellite data. Because you will search the tree for each
individual word in the text, you want the total time spent searching to be as
low as possible. Y ou can ensure an O (lg n ) search time per occurrence by
using a red-black tree or any other balanced binary search tree. W ords
appear with dif ferent frequencies, however , and a frequently used word
such as the  can end up appearing far from the root while a rarely used word
such as naumachia  appears near the root. Such an or ganization would slow
down the translation, since the number of nodes visited when searching for
a key in a binary search tree equals 1 plus the depth of the node containing
the key . Y ou want words that occur frequently in the text to be placed nearer
the root.8 Moreover , some words in the text might have no Latvian
translation,9 and such words would not appear in the binary search tree at
Page number: 483
all. How can you or ganize a binary search tree so as to minimize the
number of nodes visited in all searches, given that you know how often
each word occurs?
What you need is an optimal binary search tree . Formally , given a
sequence K  = 〈 k1 , k2 , …, kn〉  of n  distinct keys such that k1  < k2  < … < kn ,
build a binary search tree containing them. For each key ki , you are given
the probability pi  that any given search is for key ki . Since some searches
may be for values not in K , you also have n  + 1 “dummy” keys d0 , d1 , d2 ,
…, dn  representing those values. In particular , d0  represents all values less
than k1 , dn  represents all values greater than kn , and for i  = 1, 2, …, n  − 1,
the dummy key di  represents all values between ki  and ki +1 . For each
dummy key di , you have the probability qi  that a search corresponds to di .
Figure 14.9  shows two binary search trees for a set of n  = 5 keys. Each key
ki  is an internal node, and each dummy key di  is a leaf. Since every search is
either successful (finding some key ki ) or unsuccessful (finding some
dummy key di ), we have

Page number: 484
Figur e 14.9  T wo binary search trees for a set of n  = 5 keys with the following probabilities:
i 0 1 2 3 4 5
p i0 . 1 5 0 . 1 0 0 . 0 5 0 . 1 0 0 . 2 0
q i0 . 0 5 0 . 1 0 0 . 0 5 0 . 0 5 0 . 0 5 0 . 1 0
(a)  A binary search tree with expected search cost 2.80. (b)  A binary search tree with expected search
cost 2.75. This tree is optimal.
Knowing the probabilities of searches for each key and each dummy key
allows us to determine the expected cost of a search in a given binary
search tree T . Let us assume that the actual cost of a search equals the
number of nodes examined, which is the depth of the node found by the
search in T , plus 1. Then the expected cost of a search in T  is
Page number: 485
where depthT  denotes a node’ s depth in the tree T . The last equation follows
from equation (14.10). Figure 14.9  shows how to calculate the expected
search cost node by node.
For a given set of probabilities, your goal is to construct a binary search
tree whose expected search cost is smallest. W e call such a tree an optimal
binary search tree . Figure 14.9(a)  shows one binary search tree, with
expected cost 2.80, for the probabilities given in the figure caption. Part (b)
of the figure displays an optimal binary search tree, with expected cost 2.75.
This example demonstrates that an optimal binary search tree is not
necessarily a tree whose overall height is smallest. Nor does an optimal
binary search tree always have the key with the greatest probability at the
root. Here, key k5  has the greatest search probability of any key , yet the root
of the optimal binary search tree shown is k2 . (The lowest expected cost of
any binary search tree with k5  at the root is 2.85.)
As with matrix-chain multiplication, exhaustive checking of all
possibilities fails to yield an ef ficient algorithm. Y ou can label the nodes of
any n -node binary tree with the keys k1 , k2 , …, kn  to construct a binary
search tree, and then add in the dummy keys as leaves. In Problem 12-4 on
page 329, we saw that the number of binary trees with n  nodes is Ω(4n/ n3/2).
Thus you would need to examine an exponential number of binary search
trees to perform an exhaustive search. W e’ll see how to solve this problem
more ef ficiently with dynamic programming.
Step 1: The structur e of an optimal binary sear ch tr ee
T o characterize the optimal substructure of optimal binary search trees, we
start with an observation about subtrees. Consider any subtree of a binary
search tree. It must contain keys in a contiguous range ki , …, kj , for some 1
≤ i  ≤ j  ≤ n . In addition, a subtree that contains keys ki , …, kj  must also have
as its leaves the dummy keys di −1 , …, dj .
Page number: 486
Now we can state the optimal substructure: if an optimal binary search
tree T  has a subtree T ′ containing keys ki , …, kj , then this subtree T ′ must be
optimal as well for the subproblem with keys ki , …, kj  and dummy keys
di −1 , …, dj . The usual cut-and-paste ar gument applies. If there were a
subtree T ″ whose expected cost is lower than that of T ′, then cutting T ′ out
of T  and pasting in T ″ would result in a binary search tree of lower expected
cost than T , thus contradicting the optimality of T .
W ith the optimal substructure in hand, here is how to construct an
optimal solution to the problem from optimal solutions to subproblems.
Given keys ki , …, kj , one of these keys, say kr  ( i  ≤ r  ≤ j ), is the root of an
optimal subtree containing these keys. The left subtree of the root kr
contains the keys ki , …, kr −1  (and dummy keys di −1 , …, dr −1 ), and the right
subtree contains the keys kr +1 , …, kj  (and dummy keys dr , …, dj ). As long
as you examine all candidate roots kr , where i  ≤ r  ≤ j , and you determine all
optimal binary search trees containing ki , …, kr −1  and those containing kr +1 ,
…, kj , you are guaranteed to find an optimal binary search tree.
There is one technical detail worth understanding about “empty”
subtrees. Suppose that in a subtree with keys ki , …, kj , you select ki  as the
root. By the above ar gument, ki ’ s left subtree contains the keys ki , …, ki −1 :
no keys at all. Bear in mind, however , that subtrees also contain dummy
keys. W e adopt the convention that a subtree containing keys ki , …, ki −1  has
no actual keys but does contain the single dummy key di −1 . Symmetrically ,
if you select kj  as the root, then kj ’ s right subtree contains the keys kj +1 , …,
kj . This right subtree contains no actual keys, but it does contain the dummy
key dj .
Step 2: A r ecursive solution
T o define the value of an optimal solution recursively , the subproblem
domain is finding an optimal binary search tree containing the keys ki , …,
kj , where i  ≥ 1, j  ≤ n , and j  ≥ i  − 1. (When j  = i  − 1, there is just the dummy
key di −1 , but no actual keys.) Let e [ i , j ] denote the expected cost of
searching an optimal binary search tree containing the keys ki , …, kj . Y our
Page number: 487
goal is to compute e [1, n ], the expected cost of searching an optimal binary
search tree for all the actual and dummy keys.
The easy case occurs when j  = i  − 1. Then the subproblem consists of
just the dummy key di −1 . The expected search cost is e [ i , i  − 1] = qi −1 .
When j  ≥ i , you need to select a root kr  from among ki , …, kj  and then
make an optimal binary search tree with keys ki , …, kr −1  as its left subtree
and an optimal binary search tree with keys kr +1 , …, kj  as its right subtree.
What happens to the expected search cost of a subtree when it becomes a
subtree of a node? The depth of each node in the subtree increases by 1. By
equation (14.1 1), the expected search cost of this subtree increases by the
sum of all the probabilities in the subtree. For a subtree with keys ki , …, kj ,
denote this sum of probabilities as
Thus, if kr  is the root of an optimal subtree containing keys ki , …, kj , we
have
e [ i , j ] = pr  + ( e [ i , r  − 1] + w ( i , r  − 1)) + ( e [ r  + 1, j ] + w ( r  + 1, j )).
Noting that
w ( i , j ) = w ( i , r  − 1) + pr  + w ( r  + 1, j ),
we rewrite e [ i , j ] as
The recursive equation (14.13) assumes that you know which node kr  to
use as the root. Of course, you choose the root that gives the lowest
expected search cost, giving the final recursive formulation:
The e [ i , j ] values give the expected search costs in optimal binary search
trees. T o help keep track of the structure of optimal binary search trees,
Page number: 488
define r oot [ i , j ], for 1 ≤ i  ≤ j  ≤ n , to be the index r  for which kr  is the root of
an optimal binary search tree containing keys ki , …, kj . Although we’ll see
how to compute the values of r oot [ i , j ], the construction of an optimal
binary search tree from these values is left as Exercise 14.5-1.
Step 3: Computing the expected sear ch cost of an optimal binary
sear ch tr ee
At this point, you may have noticed some similarities between our
characterizations of optimal binary search trees and matrix-chain
multiplication. For both problem domains, the subproblems consist of
contiguous index subranges. A direct, recursive implementation of equation
(14.14) would be just as inef ficient as a direct, recursive matrix-chain
multiplication algorithm. Instead, you can store the e [ i , j ] values in a table
e [1 : n  + 1, 0 : n ]. The first index needs to run to n  + 1 rather than n  because
in order to have a subtree containing only the dummy key dn , you need to
compute and store e [ n  + 1, n ]. The second index needs to start from 0
because in order to have a subtree containing only the dummy key d0 , you
need to compute and store e [1, 0]. Only the entries e [ i , j ] for which j  ≥ i  − 1
are filled in. The table r oot [ i , j ] records the root of the subtree containing
keys ki , …, kj  and uses only the entries for which 1 ≤ i  ≤ j  ≤ n .
One other table makes the dynamic-programming algorithm a little
faster . Instead of computing the value of w ( i , j ) from scratch every time you
compute e [ i , j ], which would take Θ( j  − i ) additions, store these values in a
table w [1 : n  + 1, 0 : n ]. For the base case, compute w [ i , i  − 1] = qi −1  for 1 ≤
i  ≤ n  + 1. For j  ≥ i , compute
Thus, you can compute the Θ( n2) values of w [ i , j ] in Θ(1) time each.
The O PTIMAL -BST procedure on the next page takes as inputs the
probabilities p1 , …, pn  and q0 , …, qn  and the size n , and it returns the tables
e  and r oot . From the description above and the similarity to the M A TRIX -
C HAIN -O RDER  procedure in Section 14.2 , you should find the operation of
this procedure to be fairly straightforward. The for  loop of lines 2–4
initializes the values of e [ i , i  − 1]and w [ i , i  − 1]. Then the for  loop of lines
5–14 uses the recurrences (14.14) and (14.15) to compute e [ i , j ] and w [ i , j ]
Page number: 489
for all 1 ≤ i  ≤ j  ≤ n . In the first iteration, when l  = 1, the loop computes e [ i ,
i ] and w [ i , i ] for i  = 1, 2, …, n . The second iteration, with l  = 2, computes
e [ i , i  + 1] and w [ i , i  + 1] for i  = 1, 2, …, n  − 1, and so on. The innermost for
loop, in lines 10–14, tries each candidate index r  to determine which key kr
to use as the root of an optimal binary search tree containing keys ki , …, kj .
This for  loop saves the current value of the index r  in r oot [ i , j ] whenever it
finds a better key to use as the root.
O PTIMAL -BST( p , q , n )
  1 let e [1 : n  + 1, 0 : n ], w [1 : n  + 1, 0 : n ],
and r oot [1 : n , 1 : n ] be new tables
  2 for  i  = 1 to  n  + 1 //  base cases
  3 e [ i , i  − 1] = q i −1 //  equation (14.14)
  4 w [ i , i  − 1] = q i −1
  5 for  l  = 1 to  n
  6 for  i  = 1 to  n  − l  + 1
  7 j  = i  + l  − 1
  8 e [ i , j ] = ∞
  9 w [ i , j ] = w [ i , j  − 1] + p j  + q j //  equation (14.15)
10 for  r  = i  to  j //  try all possible roots r
1 1 t  = e [ i , r  − 1] + e [ r  + 1, j ] + w [ i , j ] //  equation (14.14)
12 if  t  < e [ i , j ] //  new minimum?
13 e [ i , j ] = t
14 r oot [ i , j ] = r
15 r eturn  e  and r oot
Figure 14.10  shows the tables e [ i , j ], w [ i , j ], and r oot [ i , j ] computed by
the procedure O PTIMAL -BST on the key distribution shown in Figure 14.9 .
As in the matrix-chain multiplication example of Figure 14.5 , the tables are
rotated to make the diagonals run horizontally . O PTIMAL -BST computes the
rows from bottom to top and from left to right within each row .
The O PTIMAL -BST procedure takes Θ( n3) time, just like M A TRIX -C HAIN -
O RDER . Its running time is O ( n3), since its for  loops are nested three deep
and each loop index takes on at most n  values. The loop indices in
O PTIMAL -BST do not have exactly the same bounds as those in M A TRIX -
C HAIN -O RDER , but they are within at most 1 in all directions. Thus, like
M A TRIX -C HAIN -O RDER , the O PTIMAL -BST procedure takes Ω( n3) time.
Page number: 490
Figur e 14.10  The tables e [ i , j ], w [ i , j ], and r oot [ i , j ] computed by O PTIMAL -BST on the key
distribution shown in Figure 14.9 . The tables are rotated so that the diagonals run horizontally .
Exer cises
14.5-1
W rite pseudocode for the procedure C ONSTRUCT -O PTIMAL -BST( r oot, n )
which, given the table r oot [1 : n , 1 : n ], outputs the structure of an optimal
binary search tree. For the example in Figure 14.10 , your procedure should
print out the structure
k2  is the root
k1  is the left child of k2
d0  is the left child of k1
d1  is the right child of k1
k5  is the right child of k2
k4  is the left child of k5
Page number: 491
k3  is the left child of k4
d2  is the left child of k3
d3  is the right child of k3
d4  is the right child of k4
d5  is the right child of k5
corresponding to the optimal binary search tree shown in Figure 14.9(b) .
14.5-2
Determine the cost and structure of an optimal binary search tree for a set of
n  = 7 keys with the following probabilities:
i 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
p i0.04 0.06 0.08 0.02 0.10 0.12 0.14
q i0.06 0.06 0.06 0.06 0.05 0.05 0.05 0.05
14.5-3
Suppose that instead of maintaining the table w [ i , j ], you computed the
value of w ( i , j ) directly from equation (14.12) in line 9 of O PTIMAL -BST and
used this computed value in line 1 1. How would this change af fect the
asymptotic running time of O PTIMAL -BST?
★  14.5-4
Knuth [ 264 ] has shown that there are always roots of optimal subtrees such
that r oot [ i , j  − 1] ≤ r oot [ i , j ] ≤ r oot [ i  + 1, j ] for all 1 ≤ i  < j  ≤ n . Use this fact
to modify the O PTIMAL -BST procedure to run in Θ( n2) time.
Pr oblems
14-1     Longest simple path in a directed acyclic graph
Y ou are given a directed acyclic graph G  = ( V , E ) with real-valued edge
weights and two distinguished vertices s  and t . The weight  of a path is the
sum of the weights of the edges in the path. Describe a dynamic-
programming approach for finding a longest weighted simple path from s  to
t . What is the running time of your algorithm?
14-2     Longest palindrome subsequence
Page number: 492
A palindrome  is a nonempty string over some alphabet that reads the same
forward and backward. Examples of palindromes are all strings of length 1,
civic , racecar , and aibohphobia  (fear of palindromes).
Give an ef ficient algorithm to find the longest palindrome that is a
subsequence of a given input string. For example, given the input
character , your algorithm should return carac . What is the running
time of your algorithm?
14-3     Bitonic euclidean traveling-salesperson problem
In the euclidean traveling-salesperson problem , you are given a set of n
points in the plane, and your goal is to find the shortest closed tour that
connects all n  points.
Figur e 14.1 1  Seven points in the plane, shown on a unit grid. (a)  The shortest closed tour , with
length approximately 24.89. This tour is not bitonic. (b)  The shortest bitonic tour for the same set of
points. Its length is approximately 25.58.
Figure 14.1 1(a)  shows the solution to a 7-point problem. The general
problem is NP-hard, and its solution is therefore believed to require more
than polynomial time (see Chapter 34 ).
J. L. Bentley has suggested simplifying the problem by considering only
bitonic tours , that is, tours that start at the leftmost point, go strictly
rightward to the rightmost point, and then go strictly leftward back to the
starting point. Figure 14.1 1(b)  shows the shortest bitonic tour of the same 7
points. In this case, a polynomial-time algorithm is possible.
Describe an O ( n2)-time algorithm for determining an optimal bitonic
tour . Y ou may assume that no two points have the same x -coordinate and
that all operations on real numbers take unit time. ( Hint:  Scan left to right,
maintaining optimal possibilities for the two parts of the tour .)
Page number: 493
14-4     Printing neatly
Consider the problem of neatly printing a paragraph with a monospaced
font (all characters having the same width). The input text is a sequence of
n  words of lengths l1 , l2 , …, ln , measured in characters, which are to be
printed neatly on a number of lines that hold a maximum of M  characters
each. No word exceeds the line length, so that li  ≤ M  for i  = 1, 2, …, n . The
criterion of “neatness” is as follows. If a given line contains words i  through
j , where i  ≤ j , and exactly one space appears between words, then the
number of extra space characters at the end of the line is 
, which must be nonnegative so that the words fit on the
line. The goal is to minimize the sum, over all lines except the last, of the
cubes of the numbers of extra space characters at the ends of lines. Give a
dynamic-programming algorithm to print a paragraph of n  words neatly .
Analyze the running time and space requirements of your algorithm.
14-5     Edit distance
In order to transform a source string of text x [1 : m ] to a tar get string y [1 :
n ], you can perform various transformation operations. The goal is, given x
and y , to produce a series of transformations that changes x  to y . An array z
—assumed to be lar ge enough to hold all the characters it needs—holds the
intermediate results. Initially , z  is empty , and at termination, you should
have z [ j ] = y [ j ] for j  = 1, 2, …, n . The procedure for solving this problem
maintains current indices i  into x  and j  into z , and the operations are allowed
to alter z  and these indices. Initially , i  = j  = 1. Every character in x  must be
examined during the transformation, which means that at the end of the
sequence of transformation operations, i  = m  + 1.
Y ou may choose from among six transformation operations, each of
which has a constant cost that depends on the operation:
Copy  a character from x  to z  by setting z [ j ] = x [ i ] and then incrementing
both i  and j . This operation examines x [ i ] and has cost QC .
Replace  a character from x  by another character c , by setting z [ j ] = c , and
then incrementing both i  and j . This operation examines x [ i ] and has cost
QR .
Delete  a character from x  by incrementing i  but leaving j  alone. This
operation examines x [ i ] and has cost QD .
Page number: 494
Insert  the character c  into z  by setting z [ j ] = c  and then incrementing j , but
leaving i  alone. This operation examines no characters of x  and has cost
QI .
T widdle  (i.e., exchange) the next two characters by copying them from x  to
z  but in the opposite order: setting z [ j ] = x [ i  + 1] and z [ j  + 1] = x [ i ], and
then setting i  = i  + 2 and j  = j  + 2. This operation examines x [ i ] and x [ i  +
1] and has cost QT .
Kill  the remainder of x  by setting i  = m  + 1. This operation examines all
characters in x  that have not yet been examined. This operation, if
performed, must be the final operation. It has cost QK .
Figure 14.12  gives one way to transform the source string algorithm
to the tar get string altruistic . Several other sequences of
transformation operations can transform algorithm  to altruistic .
Assume that QC  < QD  + QI  and QR  < QD  + QI , since otherwise, the copy
and replace operations would not be used. The cost of a given sequence of
transformation operations is the sum of the costs of the individual
operations in the sequence. For the sequence above, the cost of
transforming algorithm  to altruistic  is 3 QC  + QR  + QD  + 4 QI  + QT
+ QK .
a.  Given two sequences x [1 : m ] and y [1 : n ] and the costs of the
transformation operations, the edit distance  from x  to y  is the cost of the
least expensive operation sequence that transforms x  to y . Describe a
dynamic-programming algorithm that finds the edit distance from x [1 : m ]
to y [1 : n ] and prints an optimal operation sequence. Analyze the running
time and space requirements of your algorithm.
Page number: 495
Figur e 14.12  A sequence of operations that transforms the source algorithm  to the tar get string
altruistic . The underlined characters are x [ i ] and z [ j ] after the operation.
The edit-distance problem generalizes the problem of aligning two DNA
sequences (see, for example, Setubal and Meidanis [ 405 , Section 3.2 ]).
There are several methods for measuring the similarity of two DNA
sequences by aligning them. One such method to align two sequences x  and
y  consists of inserting spaces at arbitrary locations in the two sequences
(including at either end) so that the resulting sequences x ′ and y ′ have the
same length but do not have a space in the same position (i.e., for no
position j  are both x ′[ j ] and y ′[ j ] a space). Then we assign a “score” to each
position. Position j  receives a score as follows:
+1 if x ′[ j ] = y ′[ j ] and neither is a space,
−1 if x ′[ j ] ≠ y ′[ j ] and neither is a space,
−2 if either x ′[ j ] or y ′[ j ] is a space.
The score for the alignment is the sum of the scores of the individual
positions. For example, given the sequences x  = GATCGGCAT  and y  =
CAATGTGAATC , one alignment is
G ATCG GCAT
CAAT GTGAATC
-*++*+*+-++*
A +  under a position indicates a score of +1 for that position, a -  indicates a
score of −1, and a *  indicates a score of −2, so that this alignment has a
total score of 6 · 1 − 2 · 1 − 4 · 2 = −4.
Page number: 496
b.  Explain how to cast the problem of finding an optimal alignment as an
edit-distance problem using a subset of the transformation operations
copy , replace, delete, insert, twiddle, and kill.
14-6     Planning a company party
Professor Blutarsky is consulting for the president of a corporation that is
planning a company party . The company has a hierarchical structure, that is,
the supervisor relation forms a tree rooted at the president. The human
resources department has ranked each employee with a conviviality rating,
which is a real number . In order to make the party fun for all attendees, the
president does not want both an employee and his or her immediate
supervisor to attend.
Professor Blutarsky is given the tree that describes the structure of the
corporation, using the left-child, right-sibling representation described in
Section 10.3 . Each node of the tree holds, in addition to the pointers, the
name of an employee and that employee’ s conviviality ranking. Describe an
algorithm to make up a guest list that maximizes the sum of the conviviality
ratings of the guests. Analyze the running time of your algorithm.
14-7     V iterbi algorithm
Dynamic programming on a directed graph can play a part in speech
recognition. A directed graph G  = ( V , E ) with labeled edges forms a formal
model of a person speaking a restricted language. Each edge ( u , v ) ∈  E  is
labeled with a sound σ ( u , v ) from a finite set Σ of sounds. Each directed
path in the graph starting from a distinguished vertex v0  ∈  V  corresponds to
a possible sequence of sounds produced by the model, with the label of a
path being the concatenation of the labels of the edges on that path.
a.  Describe an ef ficient algorithm that, given an edge-labeled directed graph
G  with distinguished vertex v0  and a sequence s  = 〈 σ1 , σ2 , …, σk〉  of
sounds from Σ, returns a path in G  that begins at v0  and has s  as its label,
if any such path exists. Otherwise, the algorithm should return NO - SUCH -
P A TH . Analyze the running time of your algorithm. ( Hint:  Y ou may find
concepts from Chapter 20  useful.)
Now suppose that every edge ( u , v ) ∈  E  has an associated nonnegative
probability p ( u , v ) of being traversed, so that the corresponding sound is
Page number: 497
produced. The sum of the probabilities of the edges leaving any vertex
equals 1. The probability of a path is defined to be the product of the
probabilities of its edges. Think of the probability of a path beginning at
vertex v0  as the probability that a “random walk” beginning at v0  follows
the specified path, where the edge leaving a vertex u  is taken randomly ,
according to the probabilities of the available edges leaving u .
b.  Extend your answer to part (a) so that if a path is returned, it is a most
pr obable path  starting at vertex v0  and having label s . Analyze the
running time of your algorithm.
14-8     Image compression by seam carving
Suppose that you are given a color picture consisting of an m × n  array A [1 :
m , 1 : n ] of pixels, where each pixel specifies a triple of red, green, and blue
(RGB) intensities. Y ou want to compress this picture slightly , by removing
one pixel from each of the m  rows, so that the whole picture becomes one
pixel narrower . T o avoid incongruous visual ef fects, however , the pixels
removed in two adjacent rows must lie in either the same column or
adjacent columns. In this way , the pixels removed form a “seam” from the
top row to the bottom row , where successive pixels in the seam are adjacent
vertically or diagonally .
a.  Show that the number of such possible seams grows at least
exponentially in m , assuming that n  > 1.
b.  Suppose now that along with each pixel A [ i , j ], you are given a real-
valued disruption measure d [ i , j ], indicating how disruptive it would be to
remove pixel A [ i , j ]. Intuitively , the lower a pixel’ s disruption measure,
the more similar the pixel is to its neighbors. Define the disruption
measure of a seam as the sum of the disruption measures of its pixels.
Give an algorithm to find a seam with the lowest disruption measure.
How ef ficient is your algorithm?
14-9     Breaking a string
A certain string-processing programming language allows you to break a
string into two pieces. Because this operation copies the string, it costs n
time units to break a string of n  characters into two pieces. Suppose that you
want to break a string into many pieces. The order in which the breaks
Page number: 498
occur can af fect the total amount of time used. For example, suppose that
you want to break a 20-character string after characters 2, 8, and 10
(numbering the characters in ascending order from the left-hand end,
starting from 1). If you program the breaks to occur in left-to-right order ,
then the first break costs 20 time units, the second break costs 18 time units
(breaking the string from characters 3 to 20 at character 8), and the third
break costs 12 time units, totaling 50 time units. If you program the breaks
to occur in right-to-left order , however , then the first break costs 20 time
units, the second break costs 10 time units, and the third break costs 8 time
units, totaling 38 time units. In yet another order , you could break first at 8
(costing 20), then break the left piece at 2 (costing another 8), and finally
the right piece at 10 (costing 12), for a total cost of 40.
Design an algorithm that, given the numbers of characters after which to
break, determines a least-cost way to sequence those breaks. More formally ,
given an array L [1 : m ] containing the break points for a string of n
characters, compute the lowest cost for a sequence of breaks, along with a
sequence of breaks that achieves this cost.
14-10     Planning an investment strategy
Y our knowledge of algorithms helps you obtain an exciting job with a hot
startup, along with a $10,000 signing bonus. Y ou decide to invest this
money with the goal of maximizing your return at the end of 10 years. Y ou
decide to use your investment manager , G. I. Luvcache, to manage your
signing bonus. The company that Luvcache works with requires you to
observe the following rules. It of fers n  dif ferent investments, numbered 1
through n . In each year j , investment i  provides a return rate of rij . In other
words, if you invest d  dollars in investment i  in year j , then at the end of
year j , you have drij  dollars. The return rates are guaranteed, that is, you are
given all the return rates for the next 10 years for each investment. Y ou
make investment decisions only once per year . At the end of each year , you
can leave the money made in the previous year in the same investments, or
you can shift money to other investments, by either shifting money between
existing investments or moving money to a new investment. If you do not
move your money between two consecutive years, you pay a fee of f1
dollars, whereas if you switch your money , you pay a fee of f2  dollars,
where f2  > f1 . Y ou pay the fee once per year at the end of the year , and it is
Page number: 499
the same amount, f2 , whether you move money in and out of only one
investment, or in and out of many investments.
a.  The problem, as stated, allows you to invest your money in multiple
investments in each year . Prove that there exists an optimal investment
strategy that, in each year , puts all the money into a single investment.
(Recall that an optimal investment strategy maximizes the amount of
money after 10 years and is not concerned with any other objectives, such
as minimizing risk.)
b.  Prove that the problem of planning your optimal investment strategy
exhibits optimal substructure.
c.  Design an algorithm that plans your optimal investment strategy . What is
the running time of your algorithm?
d.  Suppose that Luvcache’ s company imposes the additional restriction that,
at any point, you can have no more than $15,000 in any one investment.
Show that the problem of maximizing your income at the end of 10 years
no longer exhibits optimal substructure.
14-1 1     Inventory planning
The Rinky Dink Company makes machines that resurface ice rinks. The
demand for such products varies from month to month, and so the company
needs to develop a strategy to plan its manufacturing given the fluctuating,
but predictable, demand. The company wishes to design a plan for the next
n  months. For each month i , the company knows the demand di , that is, the
number of machines that it will sell. Let 
  be the total demand over
the next n  months. The company keeps a full-time staf f who provide labor
to manufacture up to m  machines per month. If the company needs to make
more than m  machines in a given month, it can hire additional, part-time
labor , at a cost that works out to c  dollars per machine. Furthermore, if the
company is holding any unsold machines at the end of a month, it must pay
inventory costs. The company can hold up to D  machines, with the cost for
holding j  machines given as a function h ( j ) for j  = 1, 2, …, D  that
monotonically increases with j .
Give an algorithm that calculates a plan for the company that minimizes
its costs while fulfilling all the demand. The running time should be
polynomial in n  and D .
Page number: 500
14-12     Signing free-agent baseball players
Suppose that you are the general manager for a major -league baseball team.
During the of f-season, you need to sign some free-agent players for your
team. The team owner has given you a budget of $ X  to spend on free
agents. Y ou are allowed to spend less than $ X , but the owner will fire you if
you spend any more than $ X .
Y ou are considering N  dif ferent positions, and for each position, P  free-
agent players who play that position are available.10 Because you do not
want to overload your roster with too many players at any position, for each
position you may sign at most one free agent who plays that position. (If
you do not sign any players at a particular position, then you plan to stick
with the players you already have at that position.)
T o determine how valuable a player is going to be, you decide to use a
sabermetric statistic1 1 known as “W AR,” or “wins above replacement.” A
player with a higher W AR is more valuable than a player with a lower
W AR. It is not necessarily more expensive to sign a player with a higher
W AR than a player with a lower W AR, because factors other than a player ’ s
value determine how much it costs to sign them.
For each available free-agent player p , you have three pieces of
information:
the player ’ s position,
p.cost , the amount of money it costs to sign the player , and
p.war , the player ’ s W AR.
Devise an algorithm that maximizes the total W AR of the players you
sign while spending no more than $ X . Y ou may assume that each player
signs for a multiple of $100,000. Y our algorithm should output the total
W AR of the players you sign, the total amount of money you spend, and a
list of which players you sign. Analyze the running time and space
requirement of your algorithm.
Chapter notes
Bellman [ 44 ] began the systematic study of dynamic programming in 1955,
publishing a book about it in 1957. The word “programming,” both here
Page number: 501
and in linear programming, refers to using a tabular solution method.
Although optimization techniques incorporating elements of dynamic
programming were known earlier , Bellman provided the area with a solid
mathematical basis.
Galil and Park [ 172 ] classify dynamic-programming algorithms
according to the size of the table and the number of other table entries each
entry depends on. They call a dynamic-programming algorithm tD / eD  if its
table size is O ( nt) and each entry depends on O ( ne) other entries. For
example, the matrix-chain multiplication algorithm in Section 14.2  is
2 D /1 D , and the longest-common-subsequence algorithm in Section 14.4  is
2 D /0 D .
The M A TRIX -C HAIN -O RDER  algorithm on page 378 is by Muraoka and
Kuck [ 339 ]. Hu and Shing [ 230 , 231 ] give an O ( n  lg n )-time algorithm for
the matrix-chain multiplication problem.
The O ( mn )-time algorithm for the longest-common-subsequence
problem appears to be a folk algorithm. Knuth [ 95 ] posed the question of
whether subquadratic algorithms for the LCS problem exist. Masek and
Paterson [ 316 ] answered this question in the af firmative by giving an
algorithm that runs in O ( mn /lg n ) time, where n  ≤ m  and the sequences are
drawn from a set of bounded size. For the special case in which no element
appears more than once in an input sequence, Szymanski [ 425 ] shows how
to solve the problem in O (( n  + m ) lg( n  + m )) time. Many of these results
extend to the problem of computing string edit distances (Problem 14-5).
An early paper on variable-length binary encodings by Gilbert and
Moore [ 181 ], which had applications to constructing optimal binary search
trees for the case in which all probabilities pi  are 0, contains an O ( n3)-time
algorithm. Aho, Hopcroft, and Ullman [ 5 ] present the algorithm from
Section 14.5 . Splay trees [ 418 ], which modify the tree in response to the
search queries, come within a constant factor of the optimal bounds without
being initialized with the frequencies. Exercise 14.5-4 is due to Knuth
[ 264 ]. Hu and T ucker [ 232 ] devised an algorithm for the case in which all
probabilities pi  are 0 that uses O ( n2) time and O ( n ) space. Subsequently ,
Knuth [ 261 ] reduced the time to O ( n  lg n ).
Problem 14-8 is due to A vidan and Shamir [ 30 ], who have posted on the
web a wonderful video illustrating this image-compression technique.
Page number: 502
1 If pieces are required to be cut in order of monotonically increasing size, there are fewer ways to
consider . For n  = 4, only 5 such ways are possible: parts (a), (b), (c), (e), and (h) in Figure 14.2 . The
number of ways is called the partition function , which is approximately equal to 
 .
This quantity is less than 2n −1, but still much greater than any polynomial in n . W e won’ t pursue this
line of inquiry further , however .
2 The technical term “memoization” is not a misspelling of “memorization.” The word
“memoization” comes from “memo,” since the technique consists of recording a value to be looked
up later .
3 None of the three methods from Sections 4.1  and Section 4.2  can be used directly , because they
apply only to square matrices.
4 The 
  term counts all pairs in which i  < j . Because i  and j  may be equal, we need to add in the n
term.
5 W e use the term “unweighted” to distinguish this problem from that of finding shortest paths with
weighted edges, which we shall see in Chapters 22  and 23 . Y ou can use the breadth-first search
technique of Chapter 20  to solve the unweighted problem.
6 It may seem strange that dynamic programming relies on subproblems being both independent and
overlapping. Although these requirements may sound contradictory , they describe two dif ferent
notions, rather than two points on the same axis. T wo subproblems of the same problem are
independent if they do not share resources. T wo subproblems are overlapping if they are really the
same subproblem that occurs as a subproblem of dif ferent problems.
7 This approach presupposes that you know the set of all possible subproblem parameters and that
you have established the relationship between table positions and subproblems. Another , more
general, approach is to memoize by using hashing with the subproblem parameters as keys.
8 If the subject of the text is ancient Rome, you might want naumachia  to appear near the root.
9 Y es, naumachia  has a Latvian counterpart: nomačija .
10 Although there are nine positions on a baseball team, N  is not necessarily equal to 9 because some
general managers have particular ways of thinking about positions. For example, a general manager
might consider right-handed pitchers and left-handed pitchers to be separate “positions,” as well as
starting pitchers, long relief pitchers (relief pitchers who can pitch several innings), and short relief
pitchers (relief pitchers who normally pitch at most only one inning).
1 1 Sabermetrics  is the application of statistical analysis to baseball records. It provides several ways
to compare the relative values of individual players.
Page number: 503
15        Gr eedy Algorithms
Algorithms for optimization problems typically go through a sequence of
steps, with a set of choices at each step. For many optimization problems,
using dynamic programming to determine the best choices is overkill, and
simpler , more ef ficient algorithms will do. A greedy algorithm  always
makes the choice that looks best at the moment. That is, it makes a locally
optimal choice in the hope that this choice leads to a globally optimal
solution. This chapter explores optimization problems for which greedy
algorithms provide optimal solutions. Before reading this chapter , you
should read about dynamic programming in Chapter 14 , particularly
Section 14.3 .
Greedy algorithms do not always yield optimal solutions, but for many
problems they do. W e first examine, in Section 15.1 , a simple but nontrivial
problem, the activity-selection problem, for which a greedy algorithm
ef ficiently computes an optimal solution. W e’ll arrive at the greedy
algorithm by first considering a dynamic-programming approach and then
showing that an optimal solution can result from always making greedy
choices. Section 15.2  reviews the basic elements of the greedy approach,
giving a direct approach for proving greedy algorithms correct. Section 15.3
presents an important application of greedy techniques: designing data-
compression (Huf fman) codes. Finally , Section 15.4  shows that in order to
decide which blocks to replace when a miss occurs in a cache, the “furthest-
in-future” strategy is optimal if the sequence of block accesses is known in
advance.
The greedy method is quite powerful and works well for a wide range of
problems. Later chapters will present many algorithms that you can view as
applications of the greedy method, including minimum-spanning-tree
Page number: 504
algorithms ( Chapter 21 ), Dijkstra’ s algorithm for shortest paths from a
single source ( Section 22.3 ), and a greedy set-covering heuristic ( Section
35.3 ). Minimum-spanning-tree algorithms furnish a classic example of the
greedy method. Although you can read this chapter and Chapter 21
independently of each other , you might find it useful to read them together .
15.1    An activity-selection pr oblem
Our first example is the problem of scheduling several competing activities
that require exclusive use of a common resource, with a goal of selecting a
maximum-size set of mutually compatible activities. Imagine that you are in
char ge of scheduling a conference room. Y ou are presented with a set S  =
{ a1 , a2 , … , an } of n  proposed activities  that wish to reserve the conference
room, and the room can serve only one activity at a time. Each activity ai
has a start time  si  and a finish time  fi , where 0 ≤ si  < fi  < ∞. If selected,
activity ai  takes place during the half-open time interval [ si , fi ). Activities ai
and aj  are compatible  if the intervals [ si , fi ) and [ sj , fj ) do not overlap. That
is, ai  and aj  are compatible if si  ≥ fj  or sj  ≥ fi . (Assume that if your staf f
needs time to change over the room from one activity to the next, the
changeover time is built into the intervals.) In the activity-selection
problem , your goal is to select a maximum-size subset of mutually
compatible activities. Assume that the activities are sorted in monotonically
increasing order of finish time:
(W e’ll see later the advantage that this assumption provides.) For example,
consider the set of activities in Figure 15.1 . The subset { a3 , a9 , a1 1 } consists
of mutually compatible activities. It is not a maximum subset, however ,
since the subset { a1 , a4 , a8 , a1 1 } is lar ger . In fact, { a1 , a4 , a8 , a1 1 } is a
lar gest subset of mutually compatible activities, and another lar gest subset
is { a2 , a4 , a9 , a1 1 }.
W e’ll see how to solve this problem, proceeding in several steps. First
we’ll explore a dynamic-programming solution, in which you consider
several choices when determining which subproblems to use in an optimal
solution. W e’ll then observe that you need to consider only one choice—the
Page number: 505
greedy choice—and that when you make the greedy choice, only one
subproblem remains. Based on these observations, we’ll develop a recursive
greedy algorithm to solve the activity-selection problem. Finally , we’ll
complete the process of developing a greedy solution by converting the
recursive algorithm to an iterative one. Although the steps we go through in
this section are slightly more involved than is typical when developing a
greedy algorithm, they illustrate the relationship between greedy algorithms
and dynamic programming.
Figur e 15.1  A set { a 1 , a 2 , … , a 1 1 } of activities. Activity a i  has start time s i  and finish time f i .
The optimal substructur e of the activity-selection pr oblem
Let’ s verify that the activity-selection problem exhibits optimal
substructure. Denote by Sij  the set of activities that start after activity ai
finishes and that finish before activity aj  starts. Suppose that you want to
find a maximum set of mutually compatible activities in Sij , and suppose
further that such a maximum set is Aij , which includes some activity ak . By
including ak  in an optimal solution, you are left with two subproblems:
finding mutually compatible activities in the set Sik  (activities that start after
activity ai  finishes and that finish before activity ak  starts) and finding
mutually compatible activities in the set Skj  (activities that start after activity
ak  finishes and that finish before activity aj  starts). Let Aik  = Aij  ∩ Sik  and
Akj  = Aij  ∩ Skj , so that Aik  contains the activities in Aij  that finish before ak
starts and Akj  contains the activities in Aij  that start after ak  finishes. Thus,
we have Aij  = Aik  ∪  { ak } ∪  Akj , and so the maximum-size set Aij  of mutually
compatible activities in Sij  consists of | Aij  | = | Aik | + | Akj  | + 1 activities.
The usual cut-and-paste ar gument shows that an optimal solution Aij
must also include optimal solutions to the two subproblems for Sik  and Skj .
If you could find a set 
  of mutually compatible activities in Skj  where 
Page number: 506
, then you could use 
 , rather than Akj , in a solution to the
subproblem for Sij . Y ou would have constructed a set of 
 mutually compatible activities,
which contradicts the assumption that Aij  is an optimal solution. A
symmetric ar gument applies to the activities in Sik .
This way of characterizing optimal substructure suggests that you can
solve the activity-selection problem by dynamic programming. Let’ s denote
the size of an optimal solution for the set Sij  by c [ i , j ]. Then, the dynamic-
programming approach gives the recurrence
c [ i , j ] = c [ i , k ] + c [ k , j ] + 1.
Of course, if you do not know that an optimal solution for the set Sij
includes activity ak , you must examine all activities in Sij  to find which one
to choose, so that
Y ou can then develop a recursive algorithm and memoize it, or you can
work bottom-up and fill in table entries as you go along. But you would be
overlooking another important characteristic of the activity-selection
problem that you can use to great advantage.
Making the gr eedy choice
What if you could choose an activity to add to an optimal solution without
having to first solve all the subproblems? That could save you from having
to consider all the choices inherent in recurrence (15.2). In fact, for the
activity-selection problem, you need to consider only one choice: the
greedy choice.
What is the greedy choice for the activity-selection problem? Intuition
suggests that you should choose an activity that leaves the resource
available for as many other activities as possible. Of the activities you end
up choosing, one of them must be the first one to finish. Intuition says,
therefore, choose the activity in S  with the earliest finish time, since that
leaves the resource available for as many of the activities that follow it as
possible. (If more than one activity in S  has the earliest finish time, then
Page number: 507
choose any such activity .) In other words, since the activities are sorted in
monotonically increasing order by finish time, the greedy choice is activity
a1 . Choosing the first activity to finish is not the only way to think of
making a greedy choice for this problem. Exercise 15.1-3 asks you to
explore other possibilities.
Once you make the greedy choice, you have only one remaining
subproblem to solve: finding activities that start after a1  finishes. Why don’ t
you have to consider activities that finish before a1  starts? Because s1  < f1 ,
and because f1  is the earliest finish time of any activity , no activity can have
a finish time less than or equal to s1 . Thus, all activities that are compatible
with activity a1  must start after a1  finishes.
Furthermore, we have already established that the activity-selection
problem exhibits optimal substructure. Let Sk  = { ai  ∈  S  : si  ≥ fk } be the set
of activities that start after activity ak  finishes. If you make the greedy
choice of activity a1 , then S1  remains as the only subproblem to solve.1
Optimal substructure says that if a1  belongs to an optimal solution, then an
optimal solution to the original problem consists of activity a1  and all the
activities in an optimal solution to the subproblem S1 .
One big question remains: Is this intuition correct? Is the greedy choice
—in which you choose the first activity to finish—always part of some
optimal solution? The following theorem shows that it is.
Theorem 15.1
Consider any nonempty subproblem Sk , and let am  be an activity in Sk  with
the earliest finish time. Then am  is included in some maximum-size subset
of mutually compatible activities of Sk .
Proof    Let Ak  be a maximum-size subset of mutually compatible activities
in Sk , and let aj  be the activity in Ak  with the earliest finish time. If aj  = am ,
we are done, since we have shown that am  belongs to some maximum-size
subset of mutually compatible activities of Sk . If aj  ≠ am , let the set 
 be Ak  but substituting am  for aj . The activities in 
are compatible, which follows because the activities in Ak  are compatible, aj
is the first activity in Ak  to finish, and fm  ≤ fj . Since 
 , we conclude
Page number: 508
that 
  is a maximum-size subset of mutually compatible activities of Sk ,
and it includes am .
▪
Although you might be able to solve the activity-selection problem with
dynamic programming, Theorem 15.1 says that you don’ t need to. Instead,
you can repeatedly choose the activity that finishes first, keep only the
activities compatible with this activity , and repeat until no activities remain.
Moreover , because you always choose the activity with the earliest finish
time, the finish times of the activities that you choose must strictly increase.
Y ou can consider each activity just once overall, in monotonically
increasing order of finish times.
An algorithm to solve the activity-selection problem does not need to
work bottom-up, like a table-based dynamic-programming algorithm.
Instead, it can work top-down, choosing an activity to put into the optimal
solution that it constructs and then solving the subproblem of choosing
activities from those that are compatible with those already chosen. Greedy
algorithms typically have this top-down design: make a choice and then
solve a subproblem, rather than the bottom-up technique of solving
subproblems before making a choice.
A r ecursive gr eedy algorithm
Now that you know you can bypass the dynamic-programming approach
and instead use a top-down, greedy algorithm, let’ s see a straightforward,
recursive procedure to solve the activity-selection problem. The procedure
R ECURSIVE -A CTIVITY -S ELECT OR  on the following page takes the start and
finish times of the activities, represented as arrays s  and f ,2 the index k  that
defines the subproblem Sk  it is to solve, and the size n  of the original
problem. It returns a maximum-size set of mutually compatible activities in
Sk . The procedure assumes that the n  input activities are already ordered by
monotonically increasing finish time, according to equation (15.1). If not,
you can first sort them into this order in O ( n  lg n ) time, breaking ties
arbitrarily . In order to start, add the fictitious activity a0  with f0  = 0, so that
subproblem S0  is the entire set of activities S . The initial call, which solves
the entire problem, is R ECURSIVE -A CTIVITY -S ELECT OR  ( s , f , 0, n ).
Page number: 509
R ECURSIVE -A CTIVITY -S ELECT OR  ( s , f , k , n )
1 m  = k  + 1
2 while  m  ≤ n  and s [ m ] < f  [ k ] //  find the first activity in S k  to finish
3 m  = m  + 1
4 if  m  ≤ n
5 r eturn  { a m } ∪  R ECURSIVE -A CTIVITY -S ELECT OR  ( s , f , m , n )
6 else r eturn  ∅
Figure 15.2  shows how the algorithm operates on the activities in Figure
15.1 . In a given recursive call R ECURSIVE -A CTIVITY -S ELECT OR  ( s , f , k , n ), the
while  loop of lines 2–3 looks for the first activity in Sk  to finish. The loop
examines ak +1 , ak +2 , … , an , until it finds the first activity am  that is
compatible with ak , which means that sm  ≥ fk . If the loop terminates because
it finds such an activity , line 5 returns the union of { am } and the maximum-
size subset of Sm  returned by the recursive call R ECURSIVE -A CTIVITY -
S ELECT OR  ( s , f , m , n ). Alternatively , the loop may terminate because m  > n ,
in which case the procedure has examined all activities in Sk  without
finding one that is compatible with ak . In this case, Sk  = ∅ , and so line 6
returns ∅ .
Assuming that the activities have already been sorted by finish times,
the running time of the call R ECURSIVE -A CTIVITY -S ELECT OR  ( s , f , 0, n ) is
Θ( n ). T o see why , observe that over all recursive calls, each activity is
examined exactly once in the while  loop test of line 2. In particular , activity
ai  is examined in the last call made in which k  < i .
An iterative gr eedy algorithm
The recursive procedure can be converted to an iterative one because the
procedure R ECURSIVE -A CTIVITY -S ELECT OR  is almost “tail recursive” (see
Problem 7-5): it ends with a recursive call to itself followed by a union
operation. It is usually a straightforward task to transform a tail-recursive
procedure to an iterative form. In fact, some compilers for certain
programming languages perform this task automatically .
Page number: 510
Figur e 15.2  The operation of R ECURSIVE -A CTIVITY -S ELECT OR  on the 1 1 activities from
Figure 15.1 . Activities considered in each recursive call appear between horizontal lines. The
fictitious activity a 0  finishes at time 0, and the initial call R ECURSIVE -A CTIVITY -S ELECT OR  ( s ,
f , 0, 1 1), selects activity a 1 . In each recursive call, the activities that have already been selected are
blue, and the activity shown in tan is being considered. If the starting time of an activity occurs
before the finish time of the most recently added activity (the arrow between them points left), it is
rejected. Otherwise (the arrow points directly up or to the right), it is selected. The last recursive call,
R ECURSIVE -A CTIVITY -S ELECT OR  ( s , f , 1 1, 1 1), returns ∅ . The resulting set of selected
activities is { a 1 , a 4 , a 8 , a 1 1 }.
Page number: 511
The procedure G REEDY -A CTIVITY -S ELECT OR  is an iterative version of the
procedure R ECURSIVE -A CTIVITY -S ELECT OR . It, too, assumes that the input
activities are ordered by monotonically increasing finish time. It collects
selected activities into a set A  and returns this set when it is done.
G REEDY -A CTIVITY -S ELECT OR  ( s , f , n )
1 A  = { a 1 }
2 k  = 1
3 for  m  = 2 to  n
4 if  s [ m ] ≥ f  [ k ] //  is a m  in S k ?
5 A  = A  ∪  { a m } //  yes, so choose it
6 k  = m //  and continue from there
7 r eturn  A
The procedure works as follows. The variable k  indexes the most recent
addition to A , corresponding to the activity ak  in the recursive version.
Since the procedure considers the activities in order of monotonically
increasing finish time, fk  is always the maximum finish time of any activity
in A . That is,
Lines 1–2 select activity a1 , initialize A  to contain just this activity , and
initialize k  to index this activity . The for  loop of lines 3–6 finds the earliest
activity in Sk  to finish. The loop considers each activity am  in turn and adds
am  to A  if it is compatible with all previously selected activities. Such an
activity is the earliest in Sk  to finish. T o see whether activity am  is
compatible with every activity currently in A , it suf fices by equation (15.3)
to check (in line 4) that its start time sm  is not earlier than the finish time fk
of the activity most recently added to A . If activity am  is compatible, then
lines 5–6 add activity am  to A  and set k  to m . The set A  returned by the call
G REEDY -A CTIVITY -S ELECT OR  ( s , f ) is precisely the set returned by the initial
call R ECURSIVE -A CTIVITY -S ELECT OR  ( s , f , 0, n ).
Like the recursive version, G REEDY -A CTIVITY -S ELECT OR  schedules a set
of n  activities in Θ( n ) time, assuming that the activities were already sorted
initially by their finish times.
Page number: 512
Exer cises
15.1-1
Give a dynamic-programming algorithm for the activity-selection problem,
based on recurrence (15.2). Have your algorithm compute the sizes c [ i , j ] as
defined above and also produce the maximum-size subset of mutually
compatible activities. Assume that the inputs have been sorted as in
equation (15.1). Compare the running time of your solution to the running
time of G REEDY -A CTIVITY -S ELECT OR .
15.1-2
Suppose that instead of always selecting the first activity to finish, you
instead select the last activity to start that is compatible with all previously
selected activities. Describe how this approach is a greedy algorithm, and
prove that it yields an optimal solution.
15.1-3
Not just any greedy approach to the activity-selection problem produces a
maximum-size set of mutually compatible activities. Give an example to
show that the approach of selecting the activity of least duration from
among those that are compatible with previously selected activities does not
work. Do the same for the approaches of always selecting the compatible
activity that overlaps the fewest other remaining activities and always
selecting the compatible remaining activity with the earliest start time.
15.1-4
Y ou are given a set of activities to schedule among a lar ge number of
lecture halls, where any activity can take place in any lecture hall. Y ou wish
to schedule all the activities using as few lecture halls as possible. Give an
ef ficient greedy algorithm to determine which activity should use which
lecture hall.
(This problem is also known as the interval-graph coloring problem . It
is modeled by an interval graph whose vertices are the given activities and
whose edges connect incompatible activities. The smallest number of colors
required to color every vertex so that no two adjacent vertices have the
same color corresponds to finding the fewest lecture halls needed to
schedule all of the given activities.)
15.1-5
Page number: 513
Consider a modification to the activity-selection problem in which each
activity ai  has, in addition to a start and finish time, a value vi . The objective
is no longer to maximize the number of activities scheduled, but instead to
maximize the total value of the activities scheduled. That is, the goal is to
choose a set A  of compatible activities such that 
  is maximized.
Give a polynomial-time algorithm for this problem.
15.2    Elements of the gr eedy strategy
A greedy algorithm obtains an optimal solution to a problem by making a
sequence of choices. At each decision point, the algorithm makes the choice
that seems best at the moment. This heuristic strategy does not always
produce an optimal solution, but as in the activity-selection problem,
sometimes it does. This section discusses some of the general properties of
greedy methods.
The process that we followed in Section 15.1  to develop a greedy
algorithm was a bit more involved than is typical. It consisted of the
following steps:
1 . Determine the optimal substructure of the problem.
2 . Develop a recursive solution. (For the activity-selection problem,
we formulated recurrence (15.2), but bypassed developing a
recursive algorithm based solely on this recurrence.)
3 . Show that if you make the greedy choice, then only one subproblem
remains.
4 . Prove that it is always safe to make the greedy choice. (Steps 3 and
4 can occur in either order .)
5 . Develop a recursive algorithm that implements the greedy strategy .
6 . Convert the recursive algorithm to an iterative algorithm.
These steps highlighted in great detail the dynamic-programming
underpinnings of a greedy algorithm. For example, the first cut at the
activity-selection problem defined the subproblems Sij , where both i  and j
varied. W e then found that if you always make the greedy choice, you can
restrict the subproblems to be of the form Sk .
Page number: 514
An alternative approach is to fashion optimal substructure with a greedy
choice in mind, so that the choice leaves just one subproblem to solve. In
the activity-selection problem, start by dropping the second subscript and
defining subproblems of the form Sk . Then prove that a greedy choice (the
first activity am  to finish in Sk ), combined with an optimal solution to the
remaining set Sm  of compatible activities, yields an optimal solution to Sk .
More generally , you can design greedy algorithms according to the
following sequence of steps:
1 . Cast the optimization problem as one in which you make a choice
and are left with one subproblem to solve.
2 . Prove that there is always an optimal solution to the original
problem that makes the greedy choice, so that the greedy choice is
always safe.
3 . Demonstrate optimal substructure by showing that, having made the
greedy choice, what remains is a subproblem with the property that
if you combine an optimal solution to the subproblem with the
greedy choice you have made, you arrive at an optimal solution to
the original problem.
Later sections of this chapter will use this more direct process.
Nevertheless, beneath every greedy algorithm, there is almost always a
more cumbersome dynamic-programming solution.
How can you tell whether a greedy algorithm will solve a particular
optimization problem? No way works all the time, but the greedy-choice
property and optimal substructure are the two key ingredients. If you can
demonstrate that the problem has these properties, then you are well on the
way to developing a greedy algorithm for it.
Gr eedy-choice pr operty
The first key ingredient is the greedy-choice property : you can assemble a
globally optimal solution by making locally optimal (greedy) choices. In
other words, when you are considering which choice to make, you make the
choice that looks best in the current problem, without considering results
from subproblems.
Page number: 515
Here is where greedy algorithms dif fer from dynamic programming. In
dynamic programming, you make a choice at each step, but the choice
usually depends on the solutions to subproblems. Consequently , you
typically solve dynamic-programming problems in a bottom-up manner ,
progressing from smaller subproblems to lar ger subproblems.
(Alternatively , you can solve them top down, but memoizing. Of course,
even though the code works top down, you still must solve the subproblems
before making a choice.) In a greedy algorithm, you make whatever choice
seems best at the moment and then solve the subproblem that remains. The
choice made by a greedy algorithm may depend on choices so far , but it
cannot depend on any future choices or on the solutions to subproblems.
Thus, unlike dynamic programming, which solves the subproblems before
making the first choice, a greedy algorithm makes its first choice before
solving any subproblems. A dynamic-programming algorithm proceeds
bottom up, whereas a greedy strategy usually progresses top down, making
one greedy choice after another , reducing each given problem instance to a
smaller one.
Of course, you need to prove that a greedy choice at each step yields a
globally optimal solution. T ypically , as in the case of Theorem 15.1, the
proof examines a globally optimal solution to some subproblem. It then
shows how to modify the solution to substitute the greedy choice for some
other choice, resulting in one similar , but smaller , subproblem.
Y ou can usually make the greedy choice more ef ficiently than when you
have to consider a wider set of choices. For example, in the activity-
selection problem, assuming that the activities were already sorted in
monotonically increasing order by finish times, each activity needed to be
examined just once. By preprocessing the input or by using an appropriate
data structure (often a priority queue), you often can make greedy choices
quickly , thus yielding an ef ficient algorithm.
Optimal substructur e
As we saw in Chapter 14 , a problem exhibits optimal substructure  if an
optimal solution to the problem contains within it optimal solutions to
subproblems. This property is a key ingredient of assessing whether
dynamic programming applies, and it’ s also essential for greedy algorithms.
As an example of optimal substructure, recall how Section 15.1
demonstrated that if an optimal solution to subproblem Sij  includes an
Page number: 516
activity ak , then it must also contain optimal solutions to the subproblems
Sik  and Skj . Given this optimal substructure, we ar gued that if you know
which activity to use as ak , you can construct an optimal solution to Sij  by
selecting ak  along with all activities in optimal solutions to the subproblems
Sik  and Skj . This observation of optimal substructure gave rise to the
recurrence (15.2) that describes the value of an optimal solution.
Y ou will usually use a more direct approach regarding optimal
substructure when applying it to greedy algorithms. As mentioned above,
you have the luxury of assuming that you arrived at a subproblem by having
made the greedy choice in the original problem. All you really need to do is
ar gue that an optimal solution to the subproblem, combined with the greedy
choice already made, yields an optimal solution to the original problem.
This scheme implicitly uses induction on the subproblems to prove that
making the greedy choice at every step produces an optimal solution.
Gr eedy versus dynamic pr ogramming
Because both the greedy and dynamic-programming strategies exploit
optimal substructure, you might be tempted to generate a dynamic-
programming solution to a problem when a greedy solution suf fices or ,
conversely , you might mistakenly think that a greedy solution works when
in fact a dynamic-programming solution is required. T o illustrate the subtle
dif ferences between the two techniques, let’ s investigate two variants of a
classical optimization problem.
The 0-1 knapsack problem  is the following. A thief robbing a store
wants to take the most valuable load that can be carried in a knapsack
capable of carrying at most W  pounds of loot. The thief can choose to take
any subset of n  items in the store. The i th item is worth vi  dollars and
weighs wi  pounds, where vi  and wi  are integers. Which items should the
thief take? (W e call this the 0-1 knapsack problem because for each item,
the thief must either take it or leave it behind. The thief cannot take a
fractional amount of an item or take an item more than once.)
In the fractional knapsack problem , the setup is the same, but the thief
can take fractions of items, rather than having to make a binary (0-1) choice
for each item. Y ou can think of an item in the 0-1 knapsack problem as
Page number: 517
being like a gold ingot and an item in the fractional knapsack problem as
more like gold dust.
Both knapsack problems exhibit the optimal-substructure property . For
the 0-1 problem, if the most valuable load weighing at most W  pounds
includes item j , then the remaining load must be the most valuable load
weighing at most W  − wj  pounds that the thief can take from the n  − 1
original items excluding item j . For the comparable fractional problem, if if
the most valuable load weighing at most W  pounds includes weight w  of
item j , then the remaining load must be the most valuable load weighing at
most W  − w  pounds that the thief can take from the n  − 1 original items plus
wj  − w  pounds of item j .
Although the problems are similar , a greedy strategy works to solve the
fractional knapsack problem, but not the 0-1 problem. T o solve the
fractional problem, first compute the value per pound vi / wi  for each item.
Obeying a greedy strategy , the thief begins by taking as much as possible of
the item with the greatest value per pound. If the supply of that item is
exhausted and the thief can still carry more, then the thief takes as much as
possible of the item with the next greatest value per pound, and so forth,
until reaching the weight limit W . Thus, by sorting the items by value per
pound, the greedy algorithm runs in O ( n  lg n ) time. Y ou are asked to prove
that the fractional knapsack problem has the greedy-choice property in
Exercise 15.2-1.
T o see that this greedy strategy does not work for the 0-1 knapsack
problem, consider the problem instance illustrated in Figure 15.3(a) . This
example has three items and a knapsack that can hold 50 pounds. Item 1
weighs 10 pounds and is worth $60. Item 2 weighs 20 pounds and is worth
$100. Item 3 weighs 30 pounds and is worth $120. Thus, the value per
pound of item 1 is $6 per pound, which is greater than the value per pound
of either item 2 ($5 per pound) or item 3 ($4 per pound). The greedy
strategy , therefore, would take item 1 first. As you can see from the case
analysis in Figure 15.3(b) , however , the optimal solution takes items 2 and
3, leaving item 1 behind. The two possible solutions that take item 1 are
both suboptimal.
For the comparable fractional problem, however , the greedy strategy ,
which takes item 1 first, does yield an optimal solution, as shown in Figure
15.3(c) . T aking item 1 doesn’ t work in the 0-1 problem, because the thief is
unable to fill the knapsack to capacity , and the empty space lowers the
Page number: 518
ef fective value per pound of the load. In the 0-1 problem, when you
consider whether to include an item in the knapsack, you must compare the
solution to the subproblem that includes the item with the solution to the
subproblem that excludes the item before you can make the choice. The
problem formulated in this way gives rise to many overlapping
subproblems—a hallmark of dynamic programming, and indeed, as
Exercise 15.2-2 asks you to show , you can use dynamic programming to
solve the 0-1 problem.
Figur e 15.3  An example showing that the greedy strategy does not work for the 0-1 knapsack
problem. (a)  The thief must select a subset of the three items shown whose weight must not exceed
50 pounds. (b)  The optimal subset includes items 2 and 3. Any solution with item 1 is suboptimal,
even though item 1 has the greatest value per pound. (c)  For the fractional knapsack problem, taking
the items in order of greatest value per pound yields an optimal solution.
Exer cises
15.2-1
Prove that the fractional knapsack problem has the greedy-choice property .
15.2-2
Give a dynamic-programming solution to the 0-1 knapsack problem that
runs in O ( n W ) time, where n  is the number of items and W  is the maximum
weight of items that the thief can put in the knapsack.
15.2-3
Suppose that in a 0-1 knapsack problem, the order of the items when sorted
by increasing weight is the same as their order when sorted by decreasing
Page number: 519
value. Give an ef ficient algorithm to find an optimal solution to this variant
of the knapsack problem, and ar gue that your algorithm is correct.
15.2-4
Professor Gekko has always dreamed of inline skating across North Dakota.
The professor plans to cross the state on highway U.S. 2, which runs from
Grand Forks, on the eastern border with Minnesota, to W illiston, near the
western border with Montana. The professor can carry two liters of water
and can skate m  miles before running out of water . (Because North Dakota
is relatively flat, the professor does not have to worry about drinking water
at a greater rate on uphill sections than on flat or downhill sections.) The
professor will start in Grand Forks with two full liters of water . The
professor has an of ficial North Dakota state map, which shows all the
places along U.S. 2 to refill water and the distances between these locations.
The professor ’ s goal is to minimize the number of water stops along the
route across the state. Give an ef ficient method by which the professor can
determine which water stops to make. Prove that your strategy yields an
optimal solution, and give its running time.
15.2-5
Describe an ef ficient algorithm that, given a set { x1 , x2 , … , xn } of points on
the real line, determines the smallest set of unit-length closed intervals that
contains all of the given points. Ar gue that your algorithm is correct.
★  15.2-6
Show how to solve the fractional knapsack problem in O ( n ) time.
15.2-7
Y ou are given two sets A  and B , each containing n  positive integers. Y ou
can choose to reorder each set however you like. After reordering, let ai  be
the i th element of set A , and let bi  be the i th element of set B . Y ou then
receive a payof f of 
 . Give an algorithm that maximizes your payof f.
Prove that your algorithm maximizes the payof f, and state its running time,
omitting the time for reordering the sets.
15.3    Huffman codes
Page number: 520
Huf fman codes compress data well: savings of 20% to 90% are typical,
depending on the characteristics of the data being compressed. The data
arrive as a sequence of characters. Huf fman’ s greedy algorithm uses a table
giving how often each character occurs (its frequency) to build up an
optimal way of representing each character as a binary string.
Suppose that you have a 100,000-character data file that you wish to
store compactly and you know that the 6 distinct characters in the file occur
with the frequencies given by Figure 15.4 . The character a  occurs 45,000
times, the character b  occurs 13,000 times, and so on.
Y ou have many options for how to represent such a file of information.
Here, we consider the problem of designing a binary character code  (or
code  for short) in which each character is represented by a unique binary
string, which we call a codeword . If you use a fixed-length code , you need
⌈ lg n ⌉  bits to represent n  ≥ 2 characters. For 6 characters, therefore, you
need 3 bits: a  = 000, b  = 001, c  = 010, d  = 01 1, e  = 100, and f  = 101. This
method requires 300,000 bits to encode the entire file. Can you do better?
Figur e 15.4  A character -coding problem. A data file of 100,000 characters contains only the
characters a –f , with the frequencies indicated. W ith each character represented by a 3-bit codeword,
encoding the file requires 300,000 bits. W ith the variable-length code shown, the encoding requires
only 224,000 bits.
A variable-length code  can do considerably better than a fixed-length
code. The idea is simple: give frequent characters short codewords and
infrequent characters long codewords. Figure 15.4  shows such a code. Here,
the 1-bit string 0 represents a , and the 4-bit string 1 100 represents f . This
code requires
(45 · 1 + 13 · 3 + 12 · 3 + 16 · 3 + 9 · 4 + 5 · 4) · 1,000 = 224,000 bits
to represent the file, a savings of approximately 25%. In fact, this is an
optimal character code for this file, as we shall see.
Pr efix-fr ee codes
Page number: 521
W e consider here only codes in which no codeword is also a prefix of some
other codeword. Such codes are called prefix-free codes . Although we
won’ t prove it here, a prefix-free code can always achieve the optimal data
compression among any character code, and so we suf fer no loss of
generality by restricting our attention to prefix-free codes.
Encoding is always simple for any binary character code: just
concatenate the codewords representing each character of the file. For
example, with the variable-length prefix-free code of Figure 15.4 , the 4-
character file face  has the encoding 1 100 · 0 · 100 · 1 101 = 1 10001001 101,
where “·” denotes concatenation.
Prefix-free codes are desirable because they simplify decoding. Since no
codeword is a prefix of any other , the codeword that begins an encoded file
is unambiguous. Y ou can simply identify the initial codeword, translate it
back to the original character , and repeat the decoding process on the
remainder of the encoded file. In our example, the string 10001 1001 101
parses uniquely as 100 · 0 · 1 100 · 1 101, which decodes to cafe .
Figur e 15.5  T rees corresponding to the coding schemes in Figure 15.4 . Each leaf is labeled with a
character and its frequency of occurrence. Each internal node is labeled with the sum of the
frequencies of the leaves in its subtree. All frequencies are in thousands. (a)  The tree corresponding
to the fixed-length code a  = 000, b  = 001, c  = 010, d  = 01 1, e  = 100, f  = 101. (b)  The tree
corresponding to the optimal prefix-free code a  = 0, b  = 101, c  = 100, d  = 1 1 1, e  = 1 101, f  = 1 100.
The decoding process needs a convenient representation for the prefix-
free code so that you can easily pick of f the initial codeword. A binary tree
whose leaves are the given characters provides one such representation.
Interpret the binary codeword for a character as the simple path from the
Page number: 522
root to that character , where 0 means “go to the left child” and 1 means “go
to the right child.” Figure 15.5  shows the trees for the two codes of our
example. Note that these are not binary search trees, since the leaves need
not appear in sorted order and internal nodes do not contain character keys.
An optimal code for a file is always represented by a full  binary tree, in
which every nonleaf node has two children (see Exercise 15.3-2). The
fixed-length code in our example is not optimal since its tree, shown in
Figure 15.5(a) , is not a full binary tree: it contains codewords beginning
with 10, but none beginning with 1 1. Since we can now restrict our
attention to full binary trees, we can say that if C  is the alphabet from which
the characters are drawn and all character frequencies are positive, then the
tree for an optimal prefix-free code has exactly | C  | leaves, one for each
letter of the alphabet, and exactly | C  | − 1 internal nodes (see Exercise B.5-3
on page 1 175).
Given a tree T  corresponding to a prefix-free code, we can compute the
number of bits required to encode a file. For each character c  in the alphabet
C , let the attribute c . fr eq  denote the frequency of c  in the file and let dT ( c )
denote the depth of c ’ s leaf in the tree. Note that dT  ( c ) is also the length of
the codeword for character c . The number of bits required to encode a file is
thus
which we define as the cost  of the tree T .
Constructing a Huffman code
Huf fman invented a greedy algorithm that constructs an optimal prefix-free
code, called a Huf fman code  in his honor . In line with our observations in
Section 15.2 , its proof of correctness relies on the greedy-choice property
and optimal substructure. Rather than demonstrating that these properties
hold and then developing pseudocode, we present the pseudocode first.
Doing so will help clarify how the algorithm makes greedy choices.
The procedure H UFFMAN  assumes that C  is a set of n  characters and that
each character c  ∈  C  is an object with an attribute c . fr eq  giving its
frequency . The algorithm builds the tree T  corresponding to an optimal code
in a bottom-up manner . It begins with a set of | C  | leaves and performs a
Page number: 523
sequence of | C  | − 1 “mer ging” operations to create the final tree. The
algorithm uses a min-priority queue Q , keyed on the fr eq  attribute, to
identify the two least-frequent objects to mer ge together . The result of
mer ging two objects is a new object whose frequency is the sum of the
frequencies of the two objects that were mer ged.
H UFFMAN ( C )
  1 n  = | C  |  
  2 Q  = C  
  3 for  i  = 1 to  n  − 1  
  4 allocate a new node z  
  5 x  = E XTRACT -M IN ( Q )  
  6 y  = E XTRACT -M IN ( Q )  
  7 z . left  = x  
  8 z . right  = y  
  9 z . fr eq  = x . fr eq  + y . fr eq  
10 I NSER T ( Q , z )  
1 1 r eturn  E XTRACT -M IN ( Q ) //  the root of the tree is the only node left
For our example, Huf fman’ s algorithm proceeds as shown in Figure
15.6 . Since the alphabet contains 6 letters, the initial queue size is n  = 6, and
5 mer ge steps build the tree. The final tree represents the optimal prefix-free
code. The codeword for a letter is the sequence of edge labels on the simple
path from the root to the letter .
Page number: 524
Figur e 15.6  The steps of Huf fman’ s algorithm for the frequencies given in Figure 15.4 . Each part
shows the contents of the queue sorted into increasing order by frequency . Each step mer ges the two
trees with the lowest frequencies. Leaves are shown as rectangles containing a character and its
frequency . Internal nodes are shown as circles containing the sum of the frequencies of their children.
An edge connecting an internal node with its children is labeled 0 if it is an edge to a left child and 1
if it is an edge to a right child. The codeword for a letter is the sequence of labels on the edges
connecting the root to the leaf for that letter . (a)  The initial set of n  = 6 nodes, one for each letter . (b)–
(e)  Intermediate stages. (f)  The final tree.
The H UFFMAN  procedure works as follows. Line 2 initializes the min-
priority queue Q  with the characters in C . The for  loop in lines 3–10
repeatedly extracts the two nodes x  and y  of lowest frequency from the
queue and replaces them in the queue with a new node z  representing their
mer ger . The frequency of z  is computed as the sum of the frequencies of x
and y  in line 9. The node z  has x  as its left child and y  as its right child.
(This order is arbitrary . Switching the left and right child of any node yields
a dif ferent code of the same cost.) After n  − 1 mer gers, line 1 1 returns the
one node left in the queue, which is the root of the code tree.
Page number: 525
The algorithm produces the same result without the variables x  and y ,
assigning the values returned by the E XTRACT -M IN  calls directly to z . left  and
z . right  in lines 7 and 8, and changing line 9 to z . fr eq  =
z . left . fr eq + z . right . fr eq . W e’ll use the node names x  and y  in the proof of
correctness, however , so we leave them in.
The running time of Huf fman’ s algorithm depends on how the min-
priority queue Q  is implemented. Let’ s assume that it’ s implemented as a
binary min-heap (see Chapter 6 ). For a set C  of n  characters, the B UILD -
M IN -H EAP  procedure discussed in Section 6.3  can initialize Q  in line 2 in
O ( n ) time. The for  loop in lines 3–10 executes exactly n  − 1 times, and
since each heap operation runs in O (lg n ) time, the loop contributes O ( n  lg
n ) to the running time. Thus, the total running time of H UFFMAN  on a set of
n  characters is O ( n  lg n ).
Corr ectness of Huffman’ s algorithm
T o prove that the greedy algorithm H UFFMAN  is correct, we’ll show that the
problem of determining an optimal prefix-free code exhibits the greedy-
choice and optimal-substructure properties. The next lemma shows that the
greedy-choice property holds.
Lemma 15.2 (Optimal prefix-free codes have the greedy-choice property)
Let C  be an alphabet in which each character c  ∈  C  has frequency c . fr eq .
Let x  and y  be two characters in C  having the lowest frequencies. Then
there exists an optimal prefix-free code for C  in which the codewords for x
and y  have the same length and dif fer only in the last bit.
Proof    The idea of the proof is to take the tree T  representing an arbitrary
optimal prefix-free code and modify it to make a tree representing another
optimal prefix-free code such that the characters x  and y  appear as sibling
leaves of maximum depth in the new tree. In such a tree, the codewords for
x  and y  have the same length and dif fer only in the last bit.
Let a  and b  be any two characters that are sibling leaves of maximum
depth in T . W ithout loss of generality , assume that a . fr eq  ≤ b . fr eq  and x . fr eq
≤ y . fr eq . Since x . fr eq  and y . fr eq  are the two lowest leaf frequencies, in order ,
and a . fr eq  and b . fr eq  are two arbitrary frequencies, in order , we have x . fr eq
≤ a . fr eq  and y . fr eq  ≤ b . fr eq .
Page number: 526
In the remainder of the proof, it is possible that we could have x . fr eq  =
a . fr eq  or y . fr eq  = b . fr eq , but x . fr eq  = b . fr eq  implies that a . fr eq  = b . fr eq  =
x . fr eq  = y . fr eq  (see Exercise 15.3-1), and the lemma would be trivially true.
Therefore, assume that x.fr eq  ≠ b.fr eq , which means that x  ≠ b .
Figur e 15.7  An illustration of the key step in the proof of Lemma 15.2. In the optimal tree T , leaves a
and b  are two siblings of maximum depth. Leaves x  and y  are the two characters with the lowest
frequencies. They appear in arbitrary positions in T . Assuming that x  ≠ b , swapping leaves a  and x
produces tree T ′, and then swapping leaves b  and y  produces tree T  ″. Since each swap does not
increase the cost, the resulting tree T  ″ is also an optimal tree.
As Figure 15.7  shows, imagine exchanging the positions in T  of a  and x
to produce a tree T ′, and then exchanging the positions in T ′ of b  and y  to
produce a tree T ″ in which x  and y  are sibling leaves of maximum depth.
(Note that if x  = b  but y  ≠ a , then tree T  ″ does not have x  and y  as sibling
leaves of maximum depth. Because we assume that x  ≠ b , this situation
cannot occur .) By equation (15.4), the dif ference in cost between T  and T ′ is
because both a . fr eq  − x . fr eq  and dT  ( a ) − dT  ( x ) are nonnegative. More
specifically , a.fr eq  − x . fr eq  is nonnegative because x  is a minimum-
frequency leaf, and dT  ( a ) − dT  ( x ) is nonnegative because a  is a leaf of
maximum depth in T . Similarly , exchanging y  and b  does not increase the
cost, and so B ( T ′) − B ( T  ″) is nonnegative. Therefore, B ( T  ″) ≤ B ( T ′) ≤ B ( T ),
and since T  is optimal, we have B ( T ) ≤ B ( T  ″), which implies B ( T  ″) = B ( T ).
Page number: 527
Thus, T  ″ is an optimal tree in which x  and y  appear as sibling leaves of
maximum depth, from which the lemma follows.
▪
Lemma 15.2 implies that the process of building up an optimal tree by
mer gers can, without loss of generality , begin with the greedy choice of
mer ging together those two characters of lowest frequency . Why is this a
greedy choice? W e can view the cost of a single mer ger as being the sum of
the frequencies of the two items being mer ged. Exercise 15.3-4 shows that
the total cost of the tree constructed equals the sum of the costs of its
mer gers. Of all possible mer gers at each step, H UFFMAN  chooses the one
that incurs the least cost.
The next lemma shows that the problem of constructing optimal prefix-
free codes has the optimal-substructure property .
Lemma 15.3 (Optimal prefix-free codes have the optimal-substructure
property)
Let C  be a given alphabet with frequency c . fr eq  defined for each character c
∈  C . Let x  and y  be two characters in C  with minimum frequency . Let C ′ be
the alphabet C  with the characters x  and y  removed and a new character z
added, so that C ′ = ( C  − { x , y }) ∪  { z }. Define fr eq  for all characters in C ′
with the same values as in C , along with z . fr eq  = x . fr eq  + y . fr eq . Let T ′ be
any tree representing an optimal prefix-free code for alphabet C ′. Then the
tree T , obtained from T ′ by replacing the leaf node for z  with an internal
node having x  and y  as children, represents an optimal prefix-free code for
the alphabet C .
Proof    W e first show how to express the cost B ( T ) of tree T  in terms of the
cost B ( T ′) of tree T ′, by considering the component costs in equation (15.4).
For each character c  ∈  C  − { x , y }, we have that dT  ( c ) = dT′  ( c ), and hence
c . fr eq · dT  ( c ) = c . fr eq  · dT′  ( c ). Since dT  ( x ) = dT  ( y ) = dT′  ( z ) + 1, we have
x . fr eq  · d T  ( x ) + y . fr eq  · d T  ( y ) = ( x . fr eq  + y . fr eq )( d T′  ( z ) + 1)
= z . fr eq  · d T′ ( z )+ ( x . fr eq  + y . fr eq ),
from which we conclude that
B ( T ) = B ( T ′) + x . fr eq  + y . fr eq
Page number: 528
or , equivalently ,
B ( T ′) = B ( T ) − x . fr eq  − y . fr eq .
W e now prove the lemma by contradiction. Suppose that T  does not
represent an optimal prefix-free code for C . Then there exists an optimal
tree T ″ such that B ( T ″) < B ( T ). W ithout loss of generality (by Lemma 15.2),
T ″ has x  and y  as siblings. Let T″′ be the tree T ″ with the common parent of
x  and y  replaced by a leaf z  with frequency z . fr eq  = x . fr eq  + y . fr eq . Then
B ( T ‴ ) = B ( T ″) − x . fr eq  − y . fr eq
< B ( T ) − x . fr eq  − y . fr eq
= B ( T ′),
yielding a contradiction to the assumption that T ′ represents an optimal
prefix-free code for C ′. Thus, T  must represent an optimal prefix-free code
for the alphabet C .
▪
Theorem 15.4
Procedure H UFFMAN  produces an optimal prefix-free code.
Proof    Immediate from Lemmas 15.2 and 15.3.
Exer cises
15.3-1
Explain why , in the proof of Lemma 15.2, if x . fr eq  = b . fr eq , then we must
have a . fr eq  = b . fr eq  = x . fr eq  = y . fr eq .
15.3-2
Prove that a non-full binary tree cannot correspond to an optimal prefix-free
code.
15.3-3
What is an optimal Huf fman code for the following set of frequencies,
based on the first 8 Fibonacci numbers?
a :1 b :1 c :2 d :3 e :5 f :8 g :13 h :21
Can you generalize your answer to find the optimal code when the
frequencies are the first n  Fibonacci numbers?
Page number: 529
15.3-4
Prove that the total cost B ( T ) of a full binary tree T  for a code equals the
sum, over all internal nodes, of the combined frequencies of the two
children of the node.
15.3-5
Given an optimal prefix-free code on a set C  of n  characters, you wish to
transmit the code itself using as few bits as possible. Show how to represent
any optimal prefix-free code on C  using only 2 n  − 1 + n  ⌈ lg n ⌉  bits. ( Hint :
Use 2 n  − 1 bits to specify the structure of the tree, as discovered by a walk
of the tree.)
15.3-6
Generalize Huf fman’ s algorithm to ternary codewords (i.e., codewords
using the symbols 0, 1, and 2), and prove that it yields optimal ternary
codes.
15.3-7
A data file contains a sequence of 8-bit characters such that all 256
characters are about equally common: the maximum character frequency is
less than twice the minimum character frequency . Prove that Huf fman
coding in this case is no more ef ficient than using an ordinary 8-bit fixed-
length code.
15.3-8
Show that no lossless (invertible) compression scheme can guarantee that
for every input file, the corresponding output file is shorter . ( Hint : Compare
the number of possible files with the number of possible encoded files.)
15.4    Offline caching
Computer systems can decrease the time to access data by storing a subset
of the main memory in the cache : a small but faster memory . A cache
or ganizes data into cache blocks  typically comprising 32, 64, or 128 bytes.
Y ou can also think of main memory as a cache for disk-resident data in a
virtual-memory system. Here, the blocks are called pages , and 4096 bytes is
a typical size.
Page number: 530
As a computer program executes, it makes a sequence of memory
requests. Say that there are n  memory requests, to data in blocks b1 , b2 , … ,
bn , in that order . The blocks in the access sequence might not be distinct,
and indeed, any given block is usually accessed multiple times. For
example, a program that accesses four distinct blocks p , q , r , s  might make
a sequence of requests to blocks s , q , s , q , q , s , p , p , r , s , s , q , p , r , q . The
cache can hold up to some fixed number k  of cache blocks. It starts out
empty before the first request. Each request causes at most one block to
enter the cache and at most one block to be evicted from the cache. Upon a
request for block bi , any one of three scenarios may occur:
1 . Block bi  is already in the cache, due to a previous request for the
same block. The cache remains unchanged. This situation is known
as a cache hit .
2 . Block bi  is not in the cache at that time, but the cache contains fewer
than k  blocks. In this case, block bi  is placed into the cache, so that
the cache contains one more block than it did before the request.
3 . Block bi  is not in the cache at that time and the cache is full: it
contains k  blocks. Block bi  is placed into the cache, but before that
happens, some other block in the cache must be evicted from the
cache in order to make room.
The latter two situations, in which the requested block is not already in
the cache, are called cache misses . The goal is to minimize the number of
cache misses or , equivalently , to maximize the number of cache hits, over
the entire sequence of n  requests. A cache miss that occurs while the cache
holds fewer than k  blocks—that is, as the cache is first being filled up—is
known as a compulsory miss , since no prior decision could have kept the
requested block in the cache. When a cache miss occurs and the cache is
full, ideally the choice of which block to evict should allow for the smallest
possible number of cache misses over the entire sequence of future
requests.
T ypically , caching is an online problem. That is, the computer has to
decide which blocks to keep in the cache without knowing the future
requests. Here, however , let’ s consider the of fline version of this problem,
in which the computer knows in advance the entire sequence of n  requests
Page number: 531
and the cache size k , with a goal of minimizing the total number of cache
misses.
T o solve this of fline problem, you can use a greedy strategy called
furthest-in-future , which chooses to evict the block in the cache whose
next access in the request sequence comes furthest in the future. Intuitively ,
this strategy makes sense: if you’re not going to need something for a
while, why keep it around? W e’ll show that the furthest-in-future strategy is
indeed optimal by showing that the of fline caching problem exhibits
optimal substructure and that furthest-in-future has the greedy-choice
property .
Now , you might be thinking that since the computer usually doesn’ t
know the sequence of requests in advance, there is no point in studying the
of fline problem. Actually , there is. In some situations, you do know the
sequence of requests in advance. For example, if you view the main
memory as the cache and the full set of data as residing on disk (or a solid-
state drive), there are algorithms that plan out the entire set of reads and
writes in advance. Furthermore, we can use the number of cache misses
produced by an optimal algorithm as a baseline for comparing how well
online algorithms perform. W e’ll do just that in Section 27.3 .
Of fline caching can even model real-world problems. For example,
consider a scenario where you know in advance a fixed schedule of n  events
at known locations. Events may occur at a location multiple times, not
necessarily consecutively . Y ou are managing a group of k  agents, you need
to ensure that you have one agent at each location when an event occurs,
and you want to minimize the number of times that agents have to move.
Here, the agents are like the blocks, the events are like the requests, and
moving an agent is akin to a cache miss.
Optimal substructur e of offline caching
T o show that the of fline problem exhibits optimal substructure, let’ s define
the subproblem ( C , i ) as processing requests for blocks bi , bi +1 , … , bn  with
cache configuration C  at the time that the request for block bi  occurs, that is,
C  is a subset of the set of blocks such that | C  | ≤ k . A solution to subproblem
( C , i ) is a sequence of decisions that specifies which block to evict (if any)
upon each request for blocks bi , bi +1 , … , bn . An optimal solution to
subproblem ( C , i ) minimizes the number of cache misses.
Page number: 532
Consider an optimal solution S  to subproblem ( C , i ), and let C ′ be the
contents of the cache after processing the request for block bi  in solution S .
Let S ′ be the subsolution of S  for the resulting subproblem ( C ′, i  + 1). If the
request for bi  results in a cache hit, then the cache remains unchanged, so
that C ′ = C . If the request for block bi  results in a cache miss, then the
contents of the cache change, so that C ′ ≠ C . W e claim that in either case, S ′
is an optimal solution to subproblem ( C ′, i  + 1). Why? If S ′ is not an optimal
solution to subproblem ( C ′, i  + 1), then there exists another solution S ″ to
subproblem ( C ′, i  + 1) that makes fewer cache misses than S ′. Combining S ″
with the decision of S  at the request for block bi  yields another solution that
makes fewer cache misses than S , which contradicts the assumption that S  is
an optimal solution to subproblem ( C , i ).
T o quantify a recursive solution, we need a little more notation. Let RC , i
be the set of all cache configurations that can immediately follow
configuration C  after processing a request for block bi . If the request results
in a cache hit, then the cache remains unchanged, so that RC , i  = { C  }. If the
request for bi  results in a cache miss, then there are two possibilities. If the
cache is not full (| C  | < k ), then the cache is filling up and the only choice is
to insert bi  into the cache, so that RC , i = { C  ∪  { bi }}. If the cache is full (| C  |
= k ) upon a cache miss, then RC , i  contains k  potential configurations: one
for each candidate block in C  that could be evicted and replaced by block
bi . In this case, RC , i  = {( C  − { x }) ∪  { bi } : x  ∈  C  }. For example, if C  = { p ,
q , r }, k  = 3, and block s  is requested, then RC , i  = {{ p , q , s },{ p , r , s },{ q , r ,
s }}.
Let miss ( C , i ) denote the minimum number of cache misses in a solution
for subproblem ( C , i ). Here is a recurrence for miss ( C , i ):
Gr eedy-choice pr operty
T o prove that the furthest-in-future strategy yields an optimal solution, we
need to show that optimal of fline caching exhibits the greedy-choice
Page number: 533
property . Combined with the optimal-substructure property , the greedy-
choice property will prove that furthest-in-future produces the minimum
possible number of cache misses.
Theorem 15.5 (Optimal of fline caching has the greedy-choice property)
Consider a subproblem ( C , i ) when the cache C  contains k  blocks, so that it
is full, and a cache miss occurs. When block bi  is requested, let z  = bm  be
the block in C  whose next access is furthest in the future. (If some block in
the cache will never again be referenced, then consider any such block to be
block z , and add a dummy request for block z  = bm  = bn +1 .) Then evicting
block z  upon a request for block bi  is included in some optimal solution for
the subproblem ( C , i ).
Proof    Let S  be an optimal solution to subproblem ( C , i ). If S  evicts block z
upon the request for block bi , then we are done, since we have shown that
some optimal solution includes evicting z .
So now suppose that optimal solution S  evicts some other block x  when
block bi  is requested. W e’ll construct another solution S ′ to subproblem ( C ,
i ) which, upon the request for bi , evicts block z  instead of x  and induces no
more cache misses than S  does, so that S ′ is also optimal. Because dif ferent
solutions may yield dif ferent cache configurations, denote by CS , j  the
configuration of the cache under solution S  just before the request for some
block bj , and likewise for solution S ′ and CS ′, j . W e’ll show how to construct
S ′ with the following properties:
1 . For j  = i  + 1, … , m , let Dj  = CS , j  ∩ CS ′, j . Then, | Dj  | ≥ k  − 1, so that
the cache configurations CS , j  and CS ′, j  dif fer by at most one block. If
they dif fer , then CS , j  = Dj  ∪  { z } and CS ′, j  = Dj  ∪  { y } for some block
y  ≠ z .
2 . For each request of blocks bi , … , bm −1 , if solution S  has a cache hit,
then solution S ′ also has a cache hit.
3 . For all j  > m , the cache configurations CS , j  and CS ′, j  are identical.
4 . Over the sequence of requests for blocks bi , … , bm , the number of
cache misses produced by solution S ′ is at most the number of cache
misses produced by solution S .
Page number: 534
W e’ll prove inductively that these properties hold for each request.
1 . W e proceed by induction on j , for j  = i  +1, … , m . For the base case,
the initial caches CS , i  and CS ′, i  are identical. Upon the request for
block bi , solution S  evicts x  and solution S ′ evicts z . Thus, cache
configurations CS , i +1  and CS ′, i +1  dif fer by just one block, CS , i +1  =
Di +1  ∪  { z }, CS ′, i +1  = Di +1  ∪  { x }, and x  ≠ z .
The inductive step defines how solution S ′ behaves upon a request
for block bj  for i  + 1 ≤ j  ≤ m  − 1. The inductive hypothesis is that
property 1 holds when bj  is requested. Because z  = bm  is the block in
CS , i  whose next reference is furthest in the future, we know that bj  ≠
z . W e consider several scenarios:
If CS , j  = CS ′, j  (so that | Dj  | = k ), then solution S ′ makes the
same decision upon the request for bj  as S  makes, so that
CS , j +1  = CS ′, j +1 .
If | Dj | = k  − 1 and bj  ∈  Dj , then both caches already contain
block bj , and both solutions S  and S ′ have cache hits.
Therefore, CS , j +1  = CS , j  and CS ′, j +1  = CS ′, j .
If | Dj  | = k  − 1 and bj  ∉  Dj , then because CS , j  = Dj  ∪  { z } and
bj  ≠ z , solution S  has a cache miss. It evicts either block z  or
some block w  ∈  Dj .
If solution S  evicts block z , then CS , j +1  = Dj  ∪  { bj }.
There are two cases, depending on whether bj  = y :
If bj  = y , then solution S ′ has a cache hit, so that
CS ′, j +1  = CS ′, j  = Dj  ∪  { bj }. Thus, CS , j +1  = CS ′, j  +1 .
If bj  ≠ y , then solution S ′ has a cache miss. It
evicts block y , so that CS ′, j +1  = Dj  ∪  { bj  }, and
again CS , j +1  = CS ′, j +1 .
If solution S  evicts some block w  ∈  Dj , then CS , j +1  =
( Dj  − { w }) ∪  { bj , z }. Once again, there are two cases,
depending on whether bj  = y :
Page number: 535
If bj  = y , then solution S ′ has a cache hit, so that
CS ′, j +1  = CS ′, j  = Dj  ∪  { bj }. Since w  ∈  Dj  and w
was not evicted by solution S ′, we have w  ∈  CS ′, j
+1 . Therefore, w  ∉  Dj +1  and bj  ∈  Dj +1 , so that
Dj +1  = ( Dj  − { w }) ∪  { bj  }. Thus, CS , j +1  = Dj +1  ∪
{ z }, CS ′, j +1  = Dj  +1  ∪  { w }, and because w  ≠ z ,
property 1 holds when block bj +1  is requested. (In
other words, block w  replaces block y  in property
1.)
If bj  ≠ y , then solution S ′ has a cache miss. It
evicts block w , so that CS ′, j  +1  = ( Dj  − { w }) ∪  { bj ,
y }. Therefore, we have that Dj +1  = ( Dj  − { w }) ∪
{ bj  } and so CS , j +1  = Dj +1  ∪  { z } and CS ′, j +1  = Dj
+1  ∪  { y }.
2 . In the above discussion about maintaining property 1, solution S
may have a cache hit in only the first two cases, and solution S ′ has
a cache hit in these cases if and only if S  does.
3 . If CS , m  = CS ′, m , then solution S ′ makes the same decision upon the
request for block z  = bm  as S  makes, so that CS , m +1  = CS ′, m +1 . If CS , m
≠ CS ′, m , then by property 1, CS , m  = Dm ∪ { z } and CS ′, m  = Dm ∪ { y },
where y  ≠ z . In this case, solution S  has a cache hit, so that CS , m +1  =
CS , m  = Dm  ∪  { z }. Solution S ′ evicts block y  and brings in block z , so
that CS ′, m +1  = Dm  ∪  { z } = CS , m +1 . Thus, regardless of whether or not
CS , m  = CS ′, m , we have CS , m +1  = CS ′, m +1 , and starting with the request
for block bm +1 , solution S ′ simply makes the same decisions as S .
4 . By property 2, upon the requests for blocks bi , … , bm −1 , whenever
solution S  has a cache hit, so does S ′. Only the request for block bm
= z  remains to be considered. If S  has a cache miss upon the request
for bm , then regardless of whether S ′ has a cache hit or a cache miss,
we are done: S ′ has at most the same number of cache misses as S .
Page number: 536
So now suppose that S  has a cache hit and S ′ has a cache miss upon
the request for bm . W e’ll show that there exists a request for at least
one of blocks bi +1 , … , bm −1  in which the request results in a cache
miss for S  and a cache hit for S ′, thereby compensating for what
happens upon the request for block bm . The proof is by
contradiction. Assume that no request for blocks bi +1 , … , bm −1
results in a cache miss for S  and a cache hit for S ′.
W e start by observing that once the caches CS , j  and CS ′ j  are equal for
some j  > i , they remain equal thereafter . Observe also that if bm  ∈
CS , m  and bm  ∉  CS ′, m , then CS , m  ≠ CS ′, m . Therefore, solution S  cannot
have evicted block z  upon the requests for blocks bi , … , bm −1 , for if
it had, then these two cache configurations would be equal. The
remaining possibility is that upon each of these requests, we had CS , j
= Dj  ∪  { z }, CS ′, j  = Dj  ∪  { y } for some block y  ≠ z , and solution S
evicted some block w  ∈  Dj . Moreover , since none of these requests
resulted in a cache miss for S  and a cache hit for S′, the case of bj  = y
never occurred. That is, for every request of blocks bi +1 , … , bm −1 ,
the requested block bj  was never the block y  ∈  CS ′, j  − CS , j . In these
cases, after processing the request, we had CS ′, j  +1  = Dj  +1  ∪  { y }: the
dif ference between the two caches did not change. Now , let’ s go
back to the request for block bi , where afterward, we had CS ′, i +1  =
Di +1  ∪  { x }. Because every succeeding request until requesting
block bm  did not change the dif ference between the caches, we had
CS ′, j  = Dj  ∪  { x } for j  = i  + 1, … , m .
By definition, block z  = bm  is requested after block x . That means at
least one of blocks bi +1 , … , bm −1  is block x . But for j  = i  + 1, … , m ,
we have x  ∈  CS ′, j  and x  ∉  CS , j , so that at least one of these requests
had a cache hit for S ′ and a cache miss for S , a contradiction. W e
conclude that if solution S  has a cache hit and solution S ′ has a
cache miss upon the request for block bm , then some earlier request
had the opposite result, and so solution S ′ produces no more cache
Page number: 537
misses than solution S . Since S  is assumed to be optimal, S ′ is
optimal as well.
▪
Along with the optimal-substructure property , Theorem 15.5 tells us that
the furthest-in-future strategy yields the minimum number of cache misses.
Exer cises
15.4-1
W rite pseudocode for a cache manager that uses the furthest-in-future
strategy . It should take as input a set C  of blocks in the cache, the number of
blocks k  that the cache can hold, a sequence b1 , b2 , … , bn  of requested
blocks, and the index i  into the sequence for the block bi  being requested.
For each request, it should print out whether a cache hit or cache miss
occurs, and for each cache miss, it should also print out which block, if any ,
is evicted.
15.4-2
Real cache managers do not know the future requests, and so they often use
the past to decide which block to evict. The least-recently-used , or LRU ,
strategy evicts the block that, of all blocks currently in the cache, was the
least recently requested. (Y ou can think of LRU as “furthest-in-past.”) Give
an example of a request sequence in which the LRU strategy is not optimal,
by showing that it induces more cache misses than the furthest-in-future
strategy does on the same request sequence.
15.4-3
Professor Croesus suggests that in the proof of Theorem 15.5, the last
clause in property 1 can change to CS ′, j  = Dj  ∪  { x } or , equivalently , require
the block y  given in property 1 to always be the block x  evicted by solution
S  upon the request for block bi . Show where the proof breaks down with
this requirement.
15.4-4
This section has assumed that at most one block is placed into the cache
whenever a block is requested. Y ou can imagine, however , a strategy in
Page number: 538
which multiple blocks may enter the cache upon a single request. Show that
for every solution that allows multiple blocks to enter the cache upon each
request, there is another solution that brings in only one block upon each
request and is at least as good.
Pr oblems
15-1     Coin changing
Consider the problem of making change for n  cents using the smallest
number of coins. Assume that each coin’ s value is an integer .
a.  Describe a greedy algorithm to make change consisting of quarters,
dimes, nickels, and pennies. Prove that your algorithm yields an optimal
solution.
b.  Suppose that the available coins are in denominations that are powers of
c : the denominations are c0, c1, … , ck for some integers c >  1 and k  ≥ 1.
Show that the greedy algorithm always yields an optimal solution.
c.  Give a set of coin denominations for which the greedy algorithm does not
yield an optimal solution. Y our set should include a penny so that there is
a solution for every value of n .
d.  Give an O ( nk )-time algorithm that makes change for any set of k  dif ferent
coin denominations using the smallest number of coins, assuming that
one of the coins is a penny .
15-2     Scheduling to minimize average completion time
Y ou are given a set S  = { a1 , a2 , … , an } of tasks, where task ai  requires pi
units of processing time to complete. Let Ci  be the completion time  of task
ai , that is, the time at which task ai  completes processing. Y our goal is to
minimize the average completion time, that is, to minimize 
 .
For example, suppose that there are two tasks a1  and a2  with p1  = 3 and p2  =
5, and consider the schedule in which a2  runs first, followed by a1 . Then we
have C2  = 5, C1  = 8, and the average completion time is (5 + 8)/2 = 6.5. If
task a1  runs first, however , then we have C1  = 3, C2  = 8, and the average
completion time is (3 + 8)/2 = 5.5.
Page number: 539
a.  Give an algorithm that schedules the tasks so as to minimize the average
completion time. Each task must run nonpreemptively , that is, once task
ai  starts, it must run continuously for pi  units of time until it is done.
Prove that your algorithm minimizes the average completion time, and
analyze the running time of your algorithm.
b.  Suppose now that the tasks are not all available at once. That is, each task
cannot start until its release time  bi . Suppose also that tasks may be
preempted , so that a task can be suspended and restarted at a later time.
For example, a task ai  with processing time pi  = 6 and release time bi  = 1
might start running at time 1 and be preempted at time 4. It might then
resume at time 10 but be preempted at time 1 1, and it might finally
resume at time 13 and complete at time 15. T ask ai  has run for a total of 6
time units, but its running time has been divided into three pieces. Give
an algorithm that schedules the tasks so as to minimize the average
completion time in this new scenario. Prove that your algorithm
minimizes the average completion time, and analyze the running time of
your algorithm.
Chapter notes
Much more material on greedy algorithms can be found in Lawler [ 276 ]
and Papadimitriou and Steiglitz [ 353 ]. The greedy algorithm first appeared
in the combinatorial optimization literature in a 1971 article by Edmonds
[ 131 ].
The proof of correctness of the greedy algorithm for the activity-
selection problem is based on that of Gavril [ 179 ].
Huf fman codes were invented in 1952 [ 233 ]. Lelewer and Hirschber g
[ 294 ] surveys data-compression techniques known as of 1987.
The furthest-in-future strategy was proposed by Belady [ 41 ], who
suggested it for virtual-memory systems. Alternative proofs that furthest-in-
future is optimal appear in articles by Lee et al. [ 284 ] and V an Roy [ 443 ].
1 W e sometimes refer to the sets S k  as subproblems rather than as just sets of activities. The context
will make it clear whether we are referring to S k  as a set of activities or as a subproblem whose input
Page number: 540
is that set.
2 Because the pseudocode takes s  and f  as arrays, it indexes into them with square brackets rather
than with subscripts.
Page number: 541
16        Amortized Analysis
Imagine that you join Buf f ’ s Gym. Buf f char ges a membership fee of $60
per month, plus $3 for every time you use the gym. Because you are
disciplined, you visit Buf f ’ s Gym every day during the month of November .
On top of the $60 monthly char ge for November , you pay another 3 × $30 =
$90 that month. Although you can think of your fees as a flat fee of $60 and
another $90 in daily fees, you can think about it in another way . All
together , you pay $150 over 30 days, or an average of $5 per day . When
you look at your fees in this way , you are amortizing  the monthly fee over
the 30 days of the month, spreading it out at $2 per day .
Y ou can do the same thing when you analyze running times. In an
amortized analysis , you average the time required to perform a sequence of
data-structure operations over all the operations performed. W ith amortized
analysis, you show that if you average over a sequence of operations, then
the average cost of an operation is small, even though a single operation
within the sequence might be expensive. Amortized analysis dif fers from
average-case analysis in that probability is not involved. An amortized
analysis guarantees the average performance of each operation in the worst
case .
The first three sections of this chapter cover the three most common
techniques used in amortized analysis. Section 16.1  starts with aggregate
analysis, in which you determine an upper bound T  ( n ) on the total cost of a
sequence of n  operations. The average cost per operation is then T  ( n )/ n .
Y ou take the average cost as the amortized cost of each operation, so that all
operations have the same amortized cost.
Section 16.2  covers the accounting method, in which you determine an
amortized cost of each operation. When there is more than one type of
Page number: 542
operation, each type of operation may have a dif ferent amortized cost. The
accounting method overchar ges some operations early in the sequence,
storing the overchar ge as “prepaid credit” on specific objects in the data
structure. Later in the sequence, the credit pays for operations that are
char ged less than they actually cost.
Section 16.3  discusses the potential method, which is like the accounting
method in that you determine the amortized cost of each operation and may
overchar ge operations early on to compensate for underchar ges later . The
potential method maintains the credit as the “potential ener gy” of the data
structure as a whole instead of associating the credit with individual objects
within the data structure.
W e’ll use use two examples in this chapter to examine each of these
three methods. One is a stack with the additional operation M UL TIPOP ,
which pops several objects at once. The other is a binary counter that counts
up from 0 by means of the single operation I NCREMENT .
While reading this chapter , bear in mind that the char ges assigned during
an amortized analysis are for analysis purposes only . They need not—and
should not—appear in the code. If, for example, you assign a credit to an
object x  when using the accounting method, you have no need to assign an
appropriate amount to some attribute, such as x . cr edit , in the code.
When you perform an amortized analysis, you often gain insight into a
particular data structure, and this insight can help you optimize the design.
For example, Section 16.4  will use the potential method to analyze a
dynamically expanding and contracting table.
16.1    Aggr egate analysis
In aggregate analysis , you show that for all n , a sequence of n  operations
takes T  ( n ) worst-case  time in total. In the worst case, the average cost, or
amortized cost , per operation is therefore T  ( n )/ n . This amortized cost
applies to each operation, even when there are several types of operations in
the sequence. The other two methods we shall study in this chapter , the
accounting method and the potential method, may assign dif ferent
amortized costs to dif ferent types of operations.
Stack operations
Page number: 543
As the first example of aggregate analysis, let’ s analyze stacks that have
been augmented with a new operation. Section 10.1.3  presented the two
fundamental stack operations, each of which takes O (1) time:
P USH ( S , x ) pushes object x  onto stack S .
P OP ( S ) pops the top of stack S  and returns the popped object. Calling P OP  on
an empty stack generates an error .
Figur e 16.1  The action of M UL TIPOP  on a stack S , shown initially in (a) . The top 4 objects are
popped by M UL TIPOP ( S , 4), whose result is shown in (b) . The next operation is M UL TIPOP ( S , 7),
which empties the stack—shown in (c) —since fewer than 7 objects remained.
Since each of these operations runs in O (1) time, let us consider the cost of
each to be 1. The total cost of a sequence of n  P USH  and P OP  operations is
therefore n , and the actual running time for n  operations is therefore Θ( n ).
Now let’ s add the stack operation M UL TIPOP ( S , k ), which removes the k
top objects of stack S , popping the entire stack if the stack contains fewer
than k  objects. Of course, the procedure assumes that k  is positive, and
otherwise, the M UL TIPOP  operation leaves the stack unchanged. In the
pseudocode for M UL TIPOP , the operation S T ACK -E MPTY  returns T RUE  if there
are no objects currently on the stack, and F ALSE  otherwise. Figure 16.1
shows an example of M UL TIPOP .
M UL TIPOP ( S , k )
1 while  not S T ACK -E MPTY ( S ) and k  > 0
2 P OP ( S )
3 k  = k  − 1
What is the running time of M UL TIPOP ( S , k ) on a stack of s  objects? The
actual running time is linear in the number of P OP  operations actually
executed, and thus we can analyze M UL TIPOP  in terms of the abstract costs
Page number: 544
of 1 each for P USH  and P OP . The number of iterations of the while  loop is
the number min { s , k } of objects popped of f the stack. Each iteration of the
loop makes one call to P OP  in line 2. Thus, the total cost of M UL TIPOP  is min
{ s , k }, and the actual running time is a linear function of this cost.
Now let’ s analyze a sequence of n  P USH , P OP , and M UL TIPOP  operations
on an initially empty stack. The worst-case cost of a M UL TIPOP  operation in
the sequence is O ( n ), since the stack size is at most n . The worst-case time
of any stack operation is therefore O ( n ), and hence a sequence of n
operations costs O ( n2), since the sequence contains at most n  M UL TIPOP
operations costing O ( n ) each. Although this analysis is correct, the O ( n2)
result, which came from considering the worst-case cost of each operation
individually , is not tight.
Y es, a single M UL TIPOP  might be expensive, but an aggregate analysis
shows that any sequence of n  P USH , P OP , and M UL TIPOP  operations on an
initially empty stack has an upper bound on its cost of O ( n ). Why? An
object cannot be popped from the stack unless it was first pushed.
Therefore, the number of times that P OP  can be called on a nonempty stack,
including calls within M UL TIPOP , is at most the number of P USH  operations,
which is at most n . For any value of n , any sequence of n  P USH , P OP , and
M UL TIPOP  operations takes a total of O ( n ) time. A veraging over the n
operations gives an average cost per operation of O ( n )/ n  = O (1). Aggregate
analysis assigns the amortized cost of each operation to be the average cost.
In this example, therefore, all three stack operations have an amortized cost
of O (1).
T o recap: although the average cost, and hence the running time, of a
stack operation is O (1), the analysis did not rely on probabilistic reasoning.
Instead, the analysis yielded a worst-case  bound of O ( n ) on a sequence of n
operations. Dividing this total cost by n  yielded that the average cost per
operation—that is, the amortized cost—is O (1).
Incr ementing a binary counter
As another example of aggregate analysis, consider the problem of
implementing a k -bit binary counter that counts upward from 0. An array
A [0 : k  − 1] of bits represents the counter . A binary number x  that is stored
in the counter has its lowest-order bit in A [0] and its highest-order bit in A [ k
− 1], so that 
 . Initially , x  = 0, and thus A [ i ] = 0 for i  = 0, 1,
Page number: 545
… , k  − 1. T o add 1 (modulo 2k) to the value in the counter , call the
I NCREMENT  procedure.
I NCREMENT ( A , k )
1 i  = 0
2 while  i < k  and A [ i ] == 1
3 A [ i ] = 0
4 i  = i  + 1
5 if  i < k
6 A [ i ] = 1
Figure 16.2  shows what happens to a binary counter when I NCREMENT  is
called 16 times, starting with the initial value 0 and ending with the value
16. Each iteration of the while  loop in lines 2–4 adds a 1 into position i . If
A [ i ] = 1, then adding 1 flips the bit to 0 in position i  and yields a carry of 1,
to be added into position i  + 1 during the next iteration of the loop.
Otherwise, the loop ends, and then, if i  < k , A [ i ] must be 0, so that line 6
adds a 1 into position i , flipping the 0 to a 1. If the loop ends with i  = k , then
the call of I NCREMENT  flipped all k  bits from 1 to 0. The cost of each
I NCREMENT  operation is linear in the number of bits flipped.
Page number: 546
Figur e 16.2  An 8-bit binary counter as its value goes from 0 to 16 by a sequence of 16
I NCREMENT  operations. Bits that flip to achieve the next value are shaded in blue. The running cost
for flipping bits is shown at the right. The total cost is always less than twice the total number of
I NCREMENT  operations.
As with the stack example, a cursory analysis yields a bound that is
correct but not tight. A single execution of I NCREMENT  takes Θ( k ) time in
the worst case, in which all the bits in array A  are 1. Thus, a sequence of n
I NCREMENT  operations on an initially zero counter takes O ( nk ) time in the
worst case.
Although a single call of I NCREMENT  might flip all k  bits, not all bits flip
upon each call. (Note the similarity to M UL TIPOP , where a single call might
pop many objects, but not every call pops many objects.) As Figure 16.2
shows, A [0] does flip each time I NCREMENT  is called. The next bit up, A [1],
flips only every other time: a sequence of n  I NCREMENT  operations on an
initially zero counter causes A [1] to flip ⌊ n /2 ⌋  times. Similarly , bit A [2] flips
only every fourth time, or ⌊ n /4 ⌋  times in a sequence of n  I NCREMENT
operations. In general, for i  = 0, 1, … , k  − 1, bit A [ i ] flips ⌊ n /2i⌋  times in a
sequence of n  I NCREMENT  operations on an initially zero counter . For i  ≥ k ,
bit A [ i ] does not exist, and so it cannot flip. The total number of flips in the
sequence is thus
Page number: 547
by equation (A.7) on page 1 142. Thus, a sequence of n  I NCREMENT
operations on an initially zero counter takes O ( n ) time in the worst case.
The average cost of each operation, and therefore the amortized cost per
operation, is O ( n )/ n  = O (1).
Exer cises
16.1-1
If the set of stack operations includes a M UL TIPUSH  operation, which pushes
k  items onto the stack, does the O (1) bound on the amortized cost of stack
operations continue to hold?
16.1-2
Show that if a D ECREMENT  operation is included in the k -bit counter
example, n  operations can cost as much as Θ( nk ) time.
16.1-3
Use aggregate analysis to determine the amortized cost per operation for a
sequence of n  operations on a data structure in which the i th operation costs
i  if i  is an exact power of 2, and 1 otherwise.
16.2    The accounting method
In the accounting method  of amortized analysis, you assign dif fering
char ges to dif ferent operations, with some operations char ged more or less
than they actually cost. The amount that you char ge an operation is its
amortized cost . When an operation’ s amortized cost exceeds its actual cost,
you assign the dif ference to specific objects in the data structure as credit .
Credit can help pay for later operations whose amortized cost is less than
their actual cost. Thus, you can view the amortized cost of an operation as
being split between its actual cost and credit that is either deposited or used
up. Dif ferent operations may have dif ferent amortized costs. This method
dif fers from aggregate analysis, in which all operations have the same
amortized cost.
Page number: 548
Y ou must choose the amortized costs of operations carefully . If you want
to use amortized costs to show that in the worst case the average cost per
operation is small, you must ensure that the total amortized cost of a
sequence of operations provides an upper bound on the total actual cost of
the sequence. Moreover , as in aggregate analysis, the upper bound must
apply to all sequences of operations. Let’ s denote the actual cost of the i th
operation by ci  and the amortized cost of the i th operation by ĉi . Then you
need to have
for all sequences of n  operations. The total credit stored in the data structure
is the dif ference between the total amortized cost and the total actual cost,
or 
 . By inequality (16.1), the total credit associated with the
data structure must be nonnegative at all times. If you ever allowed the total
credit to become negative (the result of underchar ging early operations with
the promise of repaying the account later on), then the total amortized costs
incurred at that time would be below the total actual costs incurred. In that
case, for the sequence of operations up to that time, the total amortized cost
would not be an upper bound on the total actual cost. Thus, you must take
care that the total credit in the data structure never becomes negative.
Stack operations
T o illustrate the accounting method of amortized analysis, we return to the
stack example. Recall that the actual costs of the operations were
P USH 1,
P OP 1,
M UL TIPOP min { s , k },
where k  is the ar gument supplied to M UL TIPOP  and s  is the stack size when it
is called. Let us assign the following amortized costs:
P USH 2,
P OP 0,
M UL TIPOP 0.
The amortized cost of M UL TIPOP  is a constant (0), whereas the actual cost is
variable, and thus all three amortized costs are constant. In general, the
Page number: 549
amortized costs of the operations under consideration may dif fer from each
other , and they may even dif fer asymptotically .
Now let’ s see how to pay for any sequence of stack operations by
char ging the amortized costs. Let $1 represent each unit of cost. At first, the
stack is empty . Recall the analogy of Section 10.1.3  between the stack data
structure and a stack of plates in a cafeteria. Upon pushing a plate onto the
stack, use $1 to pay the actual cost of the push, leaving a credit of $1 (out of
the $2 char ged). Place that $1 of credit on top of the plate. At any point in
time, every plate on the stack has $1 of credit on it.
The $1 stored on the plate serves to prepay the cost of popping the plate
from the stack. A P OP  operation incurs no char ge: pay the actual cost of
popping a plate by taking the $1 of credit of f the plate. Thus, by char ging
the P USH  operation a little bit more, we can view the P OP  operation as free.
Moreover , the M UL TIPOP  operation also incurs no char ge, since it’ s just
repeated P OP  operations, each of which is free. If a M UL TIPOP  operation
pops k  plates, then the actual cost is paid by the k  dollars stored on the k
plates. Because each plate on the stack has $1 of credit on it, and the stack
always has a nonnegative number of plates, the amount of credit is always
nonnegative. Thus, for any  sequence of n  P USH , P OP , and M UL TIPOP
operations, the total amortized cost is an upper bound on the total actual
cost. Since the total amortized cost is O ( n ), so is the total actual cost.
Incr ementing a binary counter
As another illustration of the accounting method, let’ s analyze the
I NCREMENT  operation on a binary counter that starts at 0. Recall that the
running time of this operation is proportional to the number of bits flipped,
which serves as the cost for this example. Again, we’ll use $1 to represent
each unit of cost (the flipping of a bit in this example).
For the amortized analysis, the amortized cost to set a 0-bit to 1 is $2.
When a bit is set to 1, $1 of the $2 pays to actually set the bit. The second
$1 resides on the bit as credit to be used later if and when the bit is reset to
0. At any point in time, every 1-bit in the counter has $1 of credit on it, and
thus resetting a bit to 0 can be viewed as costing nothing, and the $1 on the
bit prepays for the reset.
Here is how to determine the amortized cost of I NCREMENT . The cost of
resetting the bits to 0 within the while  loop is paid for by the dollars on the
bits that are reset. The I NCREMENT  procedure sets at most one bit to 1, in line
Page number: 550
6, and therefore the amortized cost of an I NCREMENT  operation is at most $2.
The number of 1-bits in the counter never becomes negative, and thus the
amount of credit stays nonnegative at all times. Thus, for n  I NCREMENT
operations, the total amortized cost is O ( n ), which bounds the total actual
cost.
Exer cises
16.2-1
Y ou perform a sequence of P USH  and P OP  operations on a stack whose size
never exceeds k . After every k  operations, a copy of the entire stack is made
automatically , for backup purposes. Show that the cost of n  stack
operations, including copying the stack, is O ( n ) by assigning suitable
amortized costs to the various stack operations.
16.2-2
Redo Exercise 16.1-3 using an accounting method of analysis.
16.2-3
Y ou wish not only to increment a counter but also to reset it to 0 (i.e., make
all bits in it 0). Counting the time to examine or modify a bit as Θ(1), show
how to implement a counter as an array of bits so that any sequence of n
I NCREMENT  and R ESET  operations takes O ( n ) time on an initially zero
counter . ( Hint : Keep a pointer to the high-order 1.)
16.3    The potential method
Instead of representing prepaid work as credit stored with specific objects in
the data structure, the potential method  of amortized analysis represents the
prepaid work as “potential ener gy ,” or just “potential,” which can be
released to pay for future operations. The potential applies to the data
structure as a whole rather than to specific objects within the data structure.
The potential method works as follows. Starting with an initial data
structure D0 , a sequence of n  operations occurs. For each i  = 1, 2, … , n , let
ci  be the actual cost of the i th operation and Di  be the data structure that
results after applying the i th operation to data structure Di −1 . A potential
function  Φ maps each data structure Di  to a real number Φ( Di ), which is the
Page number: 551
potential  associated with Di . The amortized cost  ĉi  of the i th operation with
respect to potential function Φ is defined by
The amortized cost of each operation is therefore its actual cost plus the
change in potential due to the operation. By equation (16.2), the total
amortized cost of the n  operations is
The second equation follows from equation (A.12) on page 1 143 because
the Φ( Di ) terms telescope.
If you can define a potential function Φ so that Φ( Dn ) ≥ Φ( D0 ), then the
total amortized cost 
  gives an upper bound on the total actual cost 
. In practice, you don’ t always know how many operations might be
performed. Therefore, if you require that Φ( Di ) ≥ Φ( D0 ) for all i , then you
guarantee, as in the accounting method, that you’ve paid in advance. It’ s
usually simplest to just define Φ( D0 ) to be 0 and then show that Φ( Di ) ≥ 0
for all i . (See Exercise 16.3-1 for an easy way to handle cases in which
Φ( D0 ) ≠ 0.)
Intuitively , if the potential dif ference Φ( Di ) − Φ( Di −1 ) of the i th
operation is positive, then the amortized cost ĉi  represents an overchar ge to
the i th operation, and the potential of the data structure increases. If the
potential dif ference is negative, then the amortized cost represents an
underchar ge to the i th operation, and the decrease in the potential pays for
the actual cost of the operation.
The amortized costs defined by equations (16.2) and (16.3) depend on
the choice of the potential function Φ. Dif ferent potential functions may
yield dif ferent amortized costs, yet still be upper bounds on the actual costs.
Y ou will often find trade-of fs that you can make in choosing a potential
function. The best potential function to use depends on the desired time
bounds.
Page number: 552
Stack operations
T o illustrate the potential method, we return once again to the example of
the stack operations P USH , P OP , and M UL TIPOP . W e define the potential
function Φ on a stack to be the number of objects in the stack. The potential
of the empty initial stack D0  is Φ( D0 ) = 0. Since the number of objects in
the stack is never negative, the stack Di  that results after the i th operation
has nonnegative potential, and thus
Φ( D i ) ≥ 0
= Φ( D 0 ).
The total amortized cost of n  operations with respect to Φ therefore
represents an upper bound on the actual cost.
Now let’ s compute the amortized costs of the various stack operations. If
the i th operation on a stack containing s  objects is a P USH  operation, then
the potential dif ference is
Φ( D i ) − Φ( D i −1 ) = ( s  + 1) − s
= 1.
By equation (16.2), the amortized cost of this P USH  operation is
ĉ i= c i  + Φ( D i ) − Φ( D i −1 )
= 1 + 1
= 2.
Suppose that the i th operation on the stack of s  objects is M UL TIPOP ( S , k ),
which causes k ′ = min { s , k } objects to be popped of f the stack. The actual
cost of the operation is k ′, and the potential dif ference is
Φ( Di ) − Φ( Di −1 ) = − k ′.
Thus, the amortized cost of the M UL TIPOP  operation is
ĉ i= c i  + Φ( D i ) − Φ( D i −1 )
= k ′ − k ′
= 0.
Similarly , the amortized cost of an ordinary P OP  operation is 0.
Page number: 553
The amortized cost of each of the three operations is O (1), and thus the
total amortized cost of a sequence of n  operations is O ( n ). Since Φ( Di ) ≥
Φ( D0 ), the total amortized cost of n  operations is an upper bound on the
total actual cost. The worst-case cost of n  operations is therefore O ( n ).
Incr ementing a binary counter
As another example of the potential method, we revisit incrementing a k -bit
binary counter . This time, the potential of the counter after the i th
I NCREMENT  operation is defined to be the number of 1-bits in the counter
after the i th operation, which we’ll denote by bi .
Here is how to compute the amortized cost of an I NCREMENT  operation.
Suppose that the i th I NCREMENT  operation resets ti  bits to 0. The actual cost
ci  of the operation is therefore at most ti  + 1, since in addition to resetting ti
bits, it sets at most one bit to 1. If bi  = 0, then the i th operation had reset all
k  bits to 0, and so bi −1  = ti  = k . If bi  >  0, then bi  = bi −1  − ti  +1. In either case,
bi  ≤ bi −1  − ti  + 1, and the potential dif ference is
Φ( D i ) − Φ( D i −1 ) ≤ ( b i −1  − t i  + 1) − b i −1
= 1 − t i .
The amortized cost is therefore
ĉ i= c i  + Φ( D i ) − Φ( D i −1 )
≤ ( t i  + 1) + (1 − t i )
= 2.
If the counter starts at 0, then Φ( D0 ) = 0. Since Φ( Di ) ≥ 0 for all i , the total
amortized cost of a sequence of n  I NCREMENT  operations is an upper bound
on the total actual cost, and so the worst-case cost of n  I NCREMENT
operations is O ( n ).
The potential method provides a simple and clever way to analyze the
counter even when it does not start at 0. The counter starts with b0  1-bits,
and after n  I NCREMENT  operations it has bn  1-bits, where 0 ≤ b0 , bn  ≤ k .
Rewrite equation (16.3) as
Page number: 554
Since Φ( D0 ) = b0 , Φ( Dn ) = bn , and ĉi  ≤ 2 for all 1 ≤ i  ≤ n , the total actual
cost of n  I NCREMENT  operations is
In particular , b0  ≤ k  means that as long as k  = O ( n ), the total actual cost is
O ( n ). In other words, if at least n  = Ω( k ) I NCREMENT  operations occur , the
total actual cost is O ( n ), no matter what initial value the counter contains.
Exer cises
16.3-1
Suppose you have a potential function Φ such that Φ( Di ) ≥ Φ( D0 ) for all i ,
but Φ( D0 ) ≠ 0. Show that there exists a potential function Φ′ such that Φ′
( D0 ) = 0, Φ′( Di ) ≥ 0 for all i  ≥ 1, and the amortized costs using Φ′ are the
same as the amortized costs using Φ.
16.3-2
Redo Exercise 16.1-3 using a potential method of analysis.
16.3-3
Consider an ordinary binary min-heap data structure supporting the
instructions I NSER T  and E XTRACT -M IN  that, when there are n  items in the
heap, implements each operation in O (lg n ) worst-case time. Give a
potential function Φ such that the amortized cost of I NSER T  is O (lg n ) and
the amortized cost of E XTRACT -M IN  is O (1), and show that your potential
function yields these amortized time bounds. Note that in the analysis, n  is
the number of items currently in the heap, and you do not know a bound on
the maximum number of items that can ever be stored in the heap.
16.3-4
What is the total cost of executing n  of the stack operations P USH , P OP , and
M UL TIPOP , assuming that the stack begins with s0  objects and finishes with
Page number: 555
sn  objects?
16.3-5
Show how to implement a queue with two ordinary stacks (Exercise 10.1-7)
so that the amortized cost of each E NQUEUE  and each D EQUEUE  operation is
O (1).
16.3-6
Design a data structure to support the following two operations for a
dynamic multiset S  of integers, which allows duplicate values:
I NSER T ( S , x ) inserts x  into S .
D ELETE -LA RGER -H ALF ( S ) deletes the lar gest ⌈ | S |/2 ⌉  elements from S .
Explain how to implement this data structure so that any sequence of m
I NSER T  and D ELETE -L ARGER -H ALF  operations runs in O ( m ) time. Y our
implementation should also include a way to output the elements of S  in
O (| S |) time.
16.4    Dynamic tables
When you design an application that uses a table, you do not always know
in advance how many items the table will hold. Y ou might allocate space
for the table, only to find out later that it is not enough. The program must
then reallocate the table with a lar ger size and copy all items stored in the
original table over into the new , lar ger table. Similarly , if many items have
been deleted from the table, it might be worthwhile to reallocate the table
with a smaller size. This section studies this problem of dynamically
expanding and contracting a table. Amortized analyses will show that the
amortized cost of insertion and deletion is only O (1), even though the actual
cost of an operation is lar ge when it triggers an expansion or a contraction.
Moreover , you’ll see how to guarantee that the unused space in a dynamic
table never exceeds a constant fraction of the total space.
Let’ s assume that the dynamic table supports the operations T ABLE -
I NSER T  and T ABLE -D ELETE . T ABLE -I NSER T  inserts into the table an item that
occupies a single slot , that is, a space for one item. Likewise, T ABLE -
D ELETE  removes an item from the table, thereby freeing a slot. The details
of the data-structuring method used to or ganize the table are unimportant: it
Page number: 556
could be a stack ( Section 10.1.3 ), a heap ( Chapter 6 ), a hash table ( Chapter
1 1 ), or something else.
It is convenient to use a concept introduced in Section 1 1.2 , where we
analyzed hashing. The load factor  α ( T ) of a nonempty table T  is defined as
the number of items stored in the table divided by the size (number of slots)
of the table. An empty table (one with no slots) has size 0, and its load
factor is defined to be 1. If the load factor of a dynamic table is bounded
below by a constant, the unused space in the table is never more than a
constant fraction of the total amount of space.
W e start by analyzing a dynamic table that allows only insertion and
then move on to the more general case that supports both insertion and
deletion.
16.4.1    T able expansion
Let’ s assume that storage for a table is allocated as an array of slots. A table
fills up when all slots have been used or , equivalently , when its load factor
is 1.1 In some software environments, upon an attempt to insert an item into
a full table, the only alternative is to abort with an error . The scenario in this
section assumes, however , that the software environment, like many
modern ones, provides a memory-management system that can allocate and
free blocks of storage on request. Thus, upon inserting an item into a full
table, the system can expand  the table by allocating a new table with more
slots than the old table had. Because the table must always reside in
contiguous memory , the system must allocate a new array for the lar ger
table and then copy items from the old table into the new table.
A common heuristic allocates a new table with twice as many slots as
the old one. If the only table operations are insertions, then the load factor
of the table is always at least 1/2, and thus the amount of wasted space
never exceeds half the total space in the table.
The T ABLE -I NSER T  procedure on the following page assumes that T  is an
object representing the table. The attribute T . table  contains a pointer to the
block of storage representing the table, T . num  contains the number of items
in the table, and T . size  gives the total number of slots in the table. Initially ,
the table is empty: T . num  = T . size  = 0.
There are two types of insertion here: the T ABLE -I NSER T  procedure itself
and the elementary insertion  into a table in lines 6 and 10. W e can analyze
the running time of T ABLE -I NSER T  in terms of the number of elementary
Page number: 557
insertions by assigning a cost of 1 to each elementary insertion. In most
computing environments, the overhead for allocating an initial table in line
2 is constant and the overhead for allocating and freeing storage in lines 5
and 7 is dominated by the cost of transfer -ring items in line 6. Thus, the
actual running time of T ABLE -I NSER T  is linear in the number of elementary
insertions. An expansion  occurs when lines 5–9 execute.
T ABLE -I NSER T ( T , x )
  1 if  T . size  == 0
  2 allocate T . table  with 1 slot
  3 T . size  = 1
  4 if  T . num  == T . size
  5 allocate new - table  with 2 · T . size  slots
  6 insert all items in T . table  into new - table
  7 free T . table
  8 T . table  = new - table
  9 T . size  = 2 · T . size
10 insert x  into T . table
1 1 T . num  = T . num  + 1
Now , we’ll use all three amortized analysis techniques to analyze a
sequence of n  T ABLE -I NSER T  operations on an initially empty table. First, we
need to determine the actual cost ci  of the i th operation. If the current table
has room for the new item (or if this is the first operation), then ci  = 1, since
the only elementary insertion performed is the one in line 10. If the current
table is full, however , and an expansion occurs, then ci  = i : the cost is 1 for
the elementary insertion in line 10 plus i  − 1 for the items copied from the
old table to the new table in line 6. For n  operations, the worst-case cost of
an operation is O ( n ), which leads to an upper bound of O ( n2) on the total
running time for n  operations.
This bound is not tight, because the table rarely expands in the course of
n  T ABLE -I NSER T  operations. Specifically , the i th operation causes an
expansion only when i  − 1 is an exact power of 2. The amortized cost of an
operation is in fact O (1), as an aggregate analysis shows. The cost of the i th
operation is

Page number: 558
The total cost of n  T ABLE -I NSER T  operations is therefore
because at most n  operations cost 1 each and the costs of the remaining
operations form a geometric series. Since the total cost of n  T ABLE -I NSER T
operations is bounded by 3 n , the amortized cost of a single operation is at
most 3.
Figur e 16.3  Analysis of table expansion by the accounting method. Each call of T ABLE -I NSER T
char ges $3 as follows: $1 to pay for the elementary insertion, $1 on the item inserted as prepayment
for it to be reinserted later , and $1 on an item that was already in the table, also as prepayment for
reinsertion. (a)  The table immediately after an expansion, with 8 slots, 4 items (tan slots), and no
stored credit. (b)–(e)  After each of 4 calls to T ABLE -I NSER T , the table has one more item, with $1
stored on the new item and $1 stored on one of the 4 items that were present immediately after the
expansion. Slots with these new items are blue. (f)  Upon the next call to T ABLE -I NSER T , the table
is full, and so it expands again. Each item had $1 to pay for it to be reinserted. Now the table looks as
it did in part (a), with no stored credit but 16 slots and 8 items.
The accounting method can provide some intuition for why the
amortized cost of a T ABLE -I NSER T  operation should be 3. Y ou can think of
each item paying for three elementary insertions: inserting itself into the
current table, moving itself the next time that the table expands, and moving
some other item that was already in the table the next time that the table
expands. For example, suppose that the size of the table is m  immediately
after an expansion, as shown in Figure 16.3  for m  = 8. Then the table holds
Page number: 559
m /2 items, and it contains no credit. Each call of T ABLE -I NSER T  char ges $3.
The elementary insertion that occurs immediately costs $1. Another $1
resides on the item inserted as credit. The third $1 resides as credit on one
of the m /2 items already in the table. The table will not fill again until
another m /2 − 1 items have been inserted, and thus, by the time the table
contains m  items and is full, each item has $1 on it to pay for it to be
reinserted it during the expansion.
Now , let’ s see how to use the potential method. W e’ll use it again in
Section 16.4.2  to design a T ABLE -D ELETE  operation that has an O (1)
amortized cost as well. Just as the accounting method had no stored credit
immediately after an expansion—that is, when T . num  = T . size /2—let’ s
define the potential to be 0 when T . num  = T . size /2. As elementary insertions
occur , the potential needs to increase enough to pay for all the reinsertions
that will happen when the table next expands. The table fills after another
T . size /2 calls of T ABLE -I NSER T , when T . num  = T . size . The next call of
T ABLE -I NSER T  after these T . size /2 calls triggers an expansion with a cost of
T . size  to reinsert all the items. Therefore, over the course of T . size /2 calls of
T ABLE -I NSER T , the potential must increase from 0 to T . size . T o achieve this
increase, let’ s design the potential so that each call of T ABLE -I NSER T
increases it by
until the table expands. Y ou can see that the potential function
equals 0 immediately after the table expands, when T . num  = T . size /2, and it
increases by 2 upon each insertion until the table fills. Once the table fills,
that is, when T . num  = T . size , the potential Φ( T ) equals T . size . The initial
value of the potential is 0, and since the table is always at least half full,
T . num  ≥ T . size /2, which implies that Φ( T ) is always nonnegative. Thus, the
sum of the amortized costs of n  T ABLE -I NSER T  operations gives an upper
bound on the sum of the actual costs.
T o analyze the amortized costs of table operations, it is convenient to
think in terms of the change in potential due to each operation. Letting Φi
denote the potential after the i th operation, we can rewrite equation (16.2)
as
Page number: 560
ĉ i= c i  + Φ i  − Φ i −1
= c i  + ΔΦ i ,
where ΔΦi  is the change in potential due to the i th operation. First, consider
the case when the i th insertion does not cause the table to expand. In this
case, ΔΦi  is 2. Since the actual cost ci  is 1, the amortized cost is
ĉ i= c i  + ΔΦ i
= 1 + 2
= 3.
Now , consider the change in potential when the table does expand during
the i th insertion because it was full immediately before the insertion. Let
numi  denote the number of items stored in the table after the i th operation
and sizei  denote the total size of the table after the i th operation, so that
sizei −1  = numi −1  = i  − 1 and therefore Φi −1  = 2( sizei −1  − sizei −1 /2) = sizei −1  =
i  − 1. Immediately after the expansion, the potential goes down to 0, and
then the new item is inserted, causing the potential to increase to Φi  = 2.
Thus, when the i th insertion triggers an expansion, ΔΦi  = 2 − ( i  − 1) = 3 − i .
When the table expands in the i th T ABLE -I NSER T  operation, the actual cost ci
equals i  (to reinsert i  − 1 items and insert the i th item), giving an amortized
cost of
ĉ i= c i  + ΔΦ i
= i  + (3 − i )
= 3.
Figure 16.4  plots the values of numi , sizei , and Φi  against i . Notice how the
potential builds to pay for expanding the table.
Page number: 561
Figur e 16.4  The ef fect of a sequence of n  T ABLE -I NSER T  operations on the number num i  of items
in the table (the brown line), the number size i  of slots in the table (the blue line), and the potential Φ i
= 2( num i  − size i /2) (the red line), each being measured after the i th operation. Immediately before an
expansion, the potential has built up to the number of items in the table, and therefore it can pay for
moving all the items to the new table. Afterward, the potential drops to 0, but it immediately
increases by 2 upon insertion of the item that caused the expansion.
16.4.2    T able expansion and contraction
T o implement a T ABLE -D ELETE  operation, it is simple enough to remove the
specified item from the table. In order to limit the amount of wasted space,
however , you might want to contract  the table when the load factor
becomes too small. T able contraction is analogous to table expansion: when
the number of items in the table drops too low , allocate a new , smaller table
and then copy the items from the old table into the new one. Y ou can then
free the storage for the old table by returning it to the memory-management
system. In order to not waste space, yet keep the amortized costs low , the
insertion and deletion procedures should preserve two properties:
the load factor of the dynamic table is bounded below by a positive
constant, as well as above by 1, and
the amortized cost of a table operation is bounded above by a
constant.
Page number: 562
The actual cost of each operation equals the number of elementary
insertions or deletions.
Y ou might think that if you double the table size upon inserting an item
into a full table, then you should halve the size when deleting an item that
would cause the table to become less than half full. This strategy does
indeed guarantee that the load factor of the table never drops below 1/2.
Unfortunately , it can also cause the amortized cost of an operation to be
quite lar ge. Consider the following scenario. Perform n  operations on a
table T  of size n /2, where n  is an exact power of 2. The first n /2 operations
are insertions, which by our previous analysis cost a total of Θ( n ). At the
end of this sequence of insertions, T . num  = T . size  = n /2. For the second n /2
operations, perform the following sequence:
insert, delete, delete, insert, insert, delete, delete, insert, insert, ….
The first insertion causes the table to expand to size n . The two deletions
that follow cause the table to contract back to size n /2. T wo further
insertions cause another expansion, and so forth. The cost of each
expansion and contraction is Θ( n ), and there are Θ( n ) of them. Thus, the
total cost of the n  operations is Θ( n2), making the amortized cost of an
operation Θ( n ).
The problem with this strategy is that after the table expands, not enough
deletions occur to pay for a contraction. Likewise, after the table contracts,
not enough insertions take place to pay for an expansion.
How can we solve this problem? Allow the load factor of the table to
drop below 1/2. Specifically , continue to double the table size upon
inserting an item into a full table, but halve the table size when deleting an
item causes the table to become less than 1/4 full, rather than 1/2 full as
before. The load factor of the table is therefore bounded below by the
constant 1/4, and the load factor is 1/2 immediately after a contraction.
An expansion or contraction should exhaust all the built-up potential, so
that immediately after expansion or contraction, when the load factor is 1/2,
the table’ s potential is 0. Figure 16.5  shows the idea. As the load factor
deviates from 1/2, the potential increases so that by the time an expansion
or contraction occurs, the table has garnered suf ficient potential to pay for
copying all the items into the newly allocated table. Thus, the potential
function should grow to T . num  by the time that the load factor has either
increased to 1 or decreased to 1/4. Immediately after either expanding or
Page number: 563
contracting the table, the load factor goes back to 1/2 and the table’ s
potential reduces back to 0.
Figur e 16.5  How to think about the potential function Φ for table insertion and deletion. When the
load factor α  is 1/2, the potential is 0. In order to accumulate suf ficient potential to pay for reinserting
all T . size  items when the table fills, the potential needs to increase by 2 upon each insertion when α  ≥
1/2. Correspondingly , the potential decreases by 2 upon each deletion that leaves α  ≥ 1/2. In order to
accrue enough potential to cover the cost of reinserting all T . size /4 items when the table contracts, the
potential needs to increase by 1 upon each deletion when α  < 1/2, and correspondingly the potential
decreases by 1 upon each insertion that leaves α  < 1/2. The red area represents load factors less than
1/4, which are not allowed.
W e omit the code for T ABLE -D ELETE , since it is analogous to T ABLE -
I NSER T . W e assume that if a contraction occurs during T ABLE -D ELETE , it
occurs after the item is deleted from the table. The analysis assumes that
whenever the number of items in the table drops to 0, the table occupies no
storage. That is, if T . num  = 0, then T . size  = 0.
How do we design a potential function that gives constant amortized
time for both insertion and deletion? When the load factor is at least 1/2, the
same potential function, Φ( T ) = 2( T . num  − T . size /2), that we used for
insertion still works. When the table is at least half full, each insertion
increases the potential by 2 if the table does not expand, and each deletion
reduces the potential by 2 if it does not cause the load factor to drop below
1/2.
What about when the load factor is less than 1/2, that is, when 1/4 ≤ α ( T )
< 1/2? As before, when α ( T ) = 1/2, so that T . num  = T . size /2, the potential
Φ( T ) should be 0. T o get the load factor from 1/2 down to 1/4, T . size /4
deletions need to occur , at which time T . num  = T . size /4. T o pay for all the
reinsertions, the potential must increase from 0 to T . size /4 over these
Page number: 564
T . size /4 deletions. Therefore, for each call of T ABLE -D ELETE  until the table
contracts, the potential should increase by
Likewise, when α  < 1/2, each call of T ABLE -I NSER T  should decrease the
potential by 1. When 1/4 ≤ α ( T ) < 1/2, the potential function
Φ( T ) = T . size /2 − T . num
produces this desired behavior .
Putting the two cases together , we get the potential function
The potential of an empty table is 0 and the potential is never negative.
Thus, the total amortized cost of a sequence of operations with respect to Φ
provides an upper bound on the actual cost of the sequence. Figure 16.6
illustrates how the potential function behaves over a sequence of insertions
and deletions.
Now , let’ s determine the amortized costs of each operation. As before,
let numi  denote the number of items stored in the table after the i th
operation, sizei  denote the total size of the table after the i th operation, αi  =
numi / sizei  denote the load factor after the i th operation, Φi  denote the
potential after the i th operation, and ΔΦi  denote the change in potential due
to the i th operation. Initially , num0  = 0, size0  = 0, and Φ0  = 0.
The cases in which the table does not expand or contract and the load
factor does not cross α  = 1/2 are straightforward. As we have seen, if αi −1  ≥
1/2 and the i th operation is an insertion that does not cause the table to
expand, then ΔΦi  = 2. Likewise, if the i th operation is a deletion and αi  ≥
1/2, then ΔΦi  = −2. Furthermore, if αi −1  < 1/2 and the i th operation is a
deletion that does not trigger a contraction, then ΔΦi  = 1, and if the i th
operation is an insertion and αi  < 1/2, then ΔΦi  = −1. In other words, if no
expansion or contraction occurs and the load factor does not cross α  = 1/2,
then
Page number: 565
if the load factor stays at or above 1/2, then the potential increases by
2 for an insertion and decreases by 2 for a deletion, and
if the load factor stays below 1/2, then the potential increases by 1 for
a deletion and decreases by 1 for an insertion.
In each of these cases, the actual cost ci  of the i th operation is just 1, and so
Figur e 16.6  The ef fect of a sequence of n  T ABLE -I NSER T  and T ABLE -D ELETE  operations on the
number num i  of items in the table (the brown line), the number size i  of slots in the table (the blue
line), and the potential (the red line)
where α i  = num i / size i , each measured after the i th operation. Immediately before an expansion or
contraction, the potential has built up to the number of items in the table, and therefore it can pay for
moving all the items to the new table.
if the i th operation is an insertion, its amortized cost ĉi  is ci  + ΔΦi ,
which is 1 + 2 = 3 if the load factor stays at or above 1/2, and 1 +
(−1) = 0 if the load factor stays below 1/2, and
if the i th operation is a deletion, its amortized cost ĉi  is ci  + ΔΦi ,
which is 1 + (−2) = −1 if the load factor stays at or above 1/2, and 1 +
1 = 2 if the load factor stays below 1/2.
Page number: 566
Four cases remain: an insertion that takes the load factor from below 1/2
to 1/2, a deletion that takes the load factor from 1/2 to below 1/2, a deletion
that causes the table to contract, and an insertion that causes the table to
expand. W e analyzed that last case at the end of Section 16.4.1  to show that
its amortized cost is 3.
When the i th operation is a deletion that causes the table to contract, we
have numi −1  = sizei −1 /4 before the contraction, then the item is deleted, and
finally numi  = sizei /2 − 1 after the contraction. Thus, by equation (16.5) we
have
Φ i −1 = size i −1 /2 − num i −1
= size i −1 /2 − size i −1 /4
= size i −1 /4,
which also equals the actual cost ci  of deleting one item and copying
sizei −1 /4 − 1 items into the new , smaller table. Since numi  = sizei /2 − 1 after
the operation has completed, αi  < 1/2, and so
Φ i = size i /2 − num i
= 1,
giving ΔΦi  = 1 − sizei −1 /4. Therefore, when the i th operation is a deletion
that triggers a contraction, its amortized cost is
ĉ i= c i  + ΔΦ i
= size i −1 /4 + (1 − size i −1 /4)
= 1.
Finally , we handle the cases where the load factor fits one case of
equation (16.5) before the operation and the other case afterward. W e start
with deletion, where we have numi −1  = sizei −1 /2, so that αi −1  = 1/2,
beforehand, and numi  = sizei /2−1, so that αi  < 1/2 afterward. Because αi −1  =
1/2, we have Φi −1  = 0, and because αi  < 1/2, we have Φi  = sizei /2 − numi  =
1. Thus we get that ΔΦi  = 1 − 0 = 1. Since the i th operation is a deletion that
does not cause a contraction, the actual cost ci  equals 1, and the amortized
cost ĉi  is ci  + ΔΦi  = 1 + 1 = 2.
Page number: 567
Conversely , if the i th operation is an insertion that takes the load factor
from below 1/2 to equaling 1/2, the change in potential ΔΦi  equals −1.
Again, the actual cost ci  is 1, and now the amortized cost ĉi  is ci  + ΔΦi  = 1 +
(−1) = 0.
In summary , since the amortized cost of each operation is bounded
above by a constant, the actual time for any sequence of n  operations on a
dynamic table is O ( n ).
Exer cises
16.4-1
Using the potential method, analyze the amortized cost of the first table
insertion.
16.4-2
Y ou wish to implement a dynamic, open-address hash table. Why might you
consider the table to be full when its load factor reaches some value α  that
is strictly less than 1? Describe briefly how to make insertion into a
dynamic, open-address hash table run in such a way that the expected value
of the amortized cost per insertion is O (1). Why is the expected value of the
actual cost per insertion not necessarily O (1) for all insertions?
16.4-3
Discuss how to use the accounting method to analyze both the insertion and
deletion operations, assuming that the table doubles in size when its load
factor exceeds 1 and the table halves in size when its load factor goes below
1/4.
16.4-4
Suppose that instead of contracting a table by halving its size when its load
factor drops below 1/4, you contract the table by multiplying its size by 2/3
when its load factor drops below 1/3. Using the potential function
Φ( T ) = |2( T . num  − T . size /2)|,
show that the amortized cost of a T ABLE -D ELETE  that uses this strategy is
bounded above by a constant.
Page number: 568
Pr oblems
16-1     Binary reflected Gray code
A binary Gray code  represents a sequence of nonnegative integers in binary
such that to go from one integer to the next, exactly one bit flips every time.
The binary reflected Gray code  represents a sequence of the integers 0 to 2k
− 1 for some positive integer k  according to the following recursive method:
For k  = 1, the binary reflected Gray code is 〈 0, 1 〉 .
For k  ≥ 2, first form the binary reflected Gray code for k  − 1, giving
the 2k −1 integers 0 to 2k −1 − 1. Then form the reflection of this
sequence, which is just the sequence in reverse. (That is, the j  th
integer in the sequence becomes the (2k −1 − j  − 1)st integer in the
reflection). Next, add 2k −1 to each of the 2k −1 integers in the reflected
sequence. Finally , concatenate the two sequences.
For example, for k  = 2, first form the binary reflected Gray code 〈 0, 1 〉
for k  = 1. Its reflection is the sequence 〈 1, 0 〉 . Adding 2k −1 = 2 to each
integer in the reflection gives the sequence 〈 3, 2 〉 . Concatenating the two
sequences gives 〈 0, 1, 3, 2 〉  or , in binary , 〈 00, 01, 1 1, 10 〉 , so that each
integer dif fers from its predecessor by exactly one bit. For k  = 3, the
reflection of the binary reflected Gray code for k  = 2 is 〈 2, 3, 1, 0 〉  and
adding 2k −1 = 4 gives 〈 6, 7, 5, 4 〉 . Concatenating produces the sequence 〈 0,
1, 3, 2, 6, 7, 5, 4 〉 , which in binary is 〈 000, 001, 01 1, 010, 1 10, 1 1 1,
101,100 〉 . In the binary reflected Gray code, only one bit flips even when
wrapping around from the last integer to the first.
a.  Index the integers in a binary reflected Gray code from 0 to 2k − 1, and
consider the i th integer in the binary reflected Gray code. T o go from the
( i  −1)st integer to the i th integer in the binary reflected Gray code, exactly
one bit flips. Show how to determine which bit flips, given the index i .
b.  Assuming that given a bit number j , you can flip bit j  of an integer in
constant time, show how to compute the entire binary reflected Gray code
sequence of 2k numbers in Θ(2k) time.
16-2     Making binary search dynamic
Page number: 569
Binary search of a sorted array takes logarithmic search time, but the time
to insert a new element is linear in the size of the array . Y ou can improve
the time for insertion by keeping several sorted arrays.
Specifically , suppose that you wish to support S EARCH  and I NSER T  on a
set of n  elements. Let k  = ⌈ lg( n  + 1) ⌉ , and let the binary representation of n
be 〈 nk −1 , nk −2 , … , n0〉 . Maintain k  sorted arrays A0 , A1 , … , Ak −1 , where for
i  = 0, 1, … , k  − 1, the length of array Ai  is 2i. Each array is either full or
empty , depending on whether ni  = 1 or ni  = 0, respectively . The total
number of elements held in all k  arrays is therefore 
 . Although
each individual array is sorted, elements in dif ferent arrays bear no
particular relationship to each other .
a.  Describe how to perform the S EARCH  operation for this data structure.
Analyze its worst-case running time.
b.  Describe how to perform the I NSER T  operation. Analyze its worst-case
and amortized running times, assuming that the only operations are
I NSER T  and S EARCH .
c.  Describe how to implement D ELETE . Analyze its worst-case and
amortized running times, assuming that there can be D ELETE , I NSER T , and
S EARCH  operations.
16-3     Amortized weight-balanced trees
Consider an ordinary binary search tree augmented by adding to each node
x  the attribute x . size , which gives the number of keys stored in the subtree
rooted at x . Let α  be a constant in the range 1/2 ≤ α  < 1. W e say that a given
node x  is α-balanced  if x . left . size  ≤ α  · x . size  and x . right . size  ≤ α  · x . size .
The tree as a whole is α-balanced  if every node in the tree is α -balanced.
The following amortized approach to maintaining weight-balanced trees
was suggested by G. V ar ghese.
a.  A 1/2-balanced tree is, in a sense, as balanced as it can be. Given a node
x  in an arbitrary binary search tree, show how to rebuild the subtree
rooted at x  so that it becomes 1/2-balanced. Y our algorithm should run in
Θ( x . size ) time, and it can use O ( x . size ) auxiliary storage.
b.  Show that performing a search in an n -node α -balanced binary search
tree takes O (lg n ) worst-case time.
Page number: 570
For the remainder of this problem, assume that the constant α  is strictly
greater than 1/2. Suppose that you implement I NSER T  and D ELETE  as usual
for an n -node binary search tree, except that after every such operation, if
any node in the tree is no longer α -balanced, then you “rebuild” the subtree
rooted at the highest such node in the tree so that it becomes 1/2-balanced.
W e’ll analyze this rebuilding scheme using the potential method. For a
node x  in a binary search tree T , define
Δ( x ) = | x . left . size  − x . right . size |.
Define the potential of T  as
where c  is a suf ficiently lar ge constant that depends on α .
c.  Ar gue that any binary search tree has nonnegative potential and also that
a 1/2-balanced tree has potential 0.
d.  Suppose that m  units of potential can pay for rebuilding an m -node
subtree. How lar ge must c  be in terms of α  in order for it to take O (1)
amortized time to rebuild a subtree that is not α -balanced?
e.  Show that inserting a node into or deleting a node from an n -node α -
balanced tree costs O (lg n ) amortized time.
16-4     The cost of restructuring red-black trees
There are four basic operations on red-black trees that perform structural
modifications : node insertions, node deletions, rotations, and color changes.
W e have seen that RB-I NSER T  and RB-D ELETE  use only O (1) rotations, node
insertions, and node deletions to maintain the red-black properties, but they
may make many more color changes.
a.  Describe a legal red-black tree with n  nodes such that calling RB-I NSER T
to add the ( n  + 1)st node causes Ω(lg n ) color changes. Then describe a
legal red-black tree with n  nodes for which calling RB-D ELETE  on a
particular node causes Ω(lg n ) color changes.
Although the worst-case number of color changes per operation can be
logarithmic, you will prove that any sequence of m  RB-I NSER T  and RB-
Page number: 571
D ELETE  operations on an initially empty red-black tree causes O ( m )
structural modifications in the worst case.
b.  Some of the cases handled by the main loop of the code of both RB-
I NSER T -F IXUP  and RB-D ELETE -F IXUP  are terminating : once encountered,
they cause the loop to terminate after a constant number of additional
operations. For each of the cases of RB-I NSER T -F IXUP  and RB-D ELETE -
F IXUP , specify which are terminating and which are not. ( Hint : Look at
Figures 13.5 , 13.6 , and 13.7  in Sections 13.3  and 13.4 .)
Y ou will first analyze the structural modifications when only insertions are
performed. Let T  be a red-black tree, and define Φ( T ) to be the number of
red nodes in T . Assume that one unit of potential can pay for the structural
modifications performed by any of the three cases of RB-I NSER T -F IXUP .
c.  Let T ′ be the result of applying Case 1 of RB-I NSER T -F IXUP  to T . Ar gue
that Φ( T ′) = Φ( T ) − 1.
d.  W e can break the operation of the RB-I NSER T  procedure into three parts.
List the structural modifications and potential changes resulting from
lines 1–16 of RB-I NSER T , from nonterminating cases of RB-I NSER T -F IXUP ,
and from terminating cases of RB-I NSER T -F IXUP .
e.  Using part (d), ar gue that the amortized number of structural
modifications performed by any call of RB-I NSER T  is O (1).
Next you will prove that there are O ( m ) structural modifications when both
insertions and deletions occur . Define, for each node x ,
Now redefine the potential of a red-black tree T  as
and let T ′ be the tree that results from applying any nonterminating case of
RB-I NSER T -F IXUP  or RB-D ELETE -F IXUP  to T .
Page number: 572
f.  Show that Φ( T ′) ≤ Φ( T ) − 1 for all nonterminating cases of RB-I NSER T -
F IXUP . Ar gue that the amortized number of structural modifications
performed by any call of RB-I NSER T -F IXUP  is O (1).
g.  Show that Φ( T ′) ≤ Φ( T ) − 1 for all nonterminating cases of RB-D ELETE -
F IXUP . Ar gue that the amortized number of structural modifications
performed by any call of RB-D ELETE -F IXUP  is O (1).
h.  Complete the proof that in the worst case, any sequence of m  RB-I NSER T
and RB-D ELETE  operations performs O ( m ) structural modifications.
Chapter notes
Aho, Hopcroft, and Ullman [ 5 ] used aggregate analysis to determine the
running time of operations on a disjoint-set forest. W e’ll analyze this data
structure using the potential method in Chapter 19 . T arjan [ 430 ] surveys the
accounting and potential methods of amortized analysis and presents
several applications. He attributes the accounting method to several authors,
including M. R. Brown, R. E. T arjan, S. Huddleston, and K. Mehlhorn. He
attributes the potential method to D. D. Sleator . The term “amortized” is
due to D. D. Sleator and R. E. T arjan.
Potential functions are also useful for proving lower bounds for certain
types of problems. For each configuration of the problem, define a potential
function that maps the configuration to a real number . Then determine the
potential Φinit  of the initial configuration, the potential Φfinal  of the final
configuration, and the maximum change in potential ΔΦmax  due to any step.
The number of steps must therefore be at least |Φfinal  − Φinit | / | ΔΦmax |.
Examples of potential functions to prove lower bounds in I/O complexity
appear in works by Cormen, Sundquist, and W isniewski [ 105 ], Floyd [ 146 ],
and Aggarwal and V itter [ 3 ]. Krumme, Cybenko, and V enkataraman [ 271 ]
applied potential functions to prove lower bounds on gossiping :
communicating a unique item from each vertex in a graph to every other
vertex.
1 In some situations, such as an open-address hash table, it’ s better to consider a table to be full if its
load factor equals some constant strictly less than 1. (See Exercise 16.4-2.)
Page number: 573
Part V     Advanced Data Structures
Page number: 574
 
 
Intr oduction
This part returns to studying data structures that support operations on
dynamic sets, but at a more advanced level than Part III . One of the
chapters, for example, makes extensive use of the amortized analysis
techniques from Chapter 16 .
Chapter 17  shows how to augment red-black trees—adding additional
information in each node—to support dynamic-set operations in addition to
those covered in Chapters 12  and 13 . The first example augments red-black
trees to dynamically maintain order statistics for a set of keys. Another
example augments them in a dif ferent way to maintain intervals of real
numbers. Chapter 17  includes a theorem giving suf ficient conditions for
when a red-black tree can be augmented while maintaining the O (lg n )
running times for insertion and deletion.
Chapter 18  presents B-trees, which are balanced search trees specifically
designed to be stored on disks. Since disks operate much more slowly than
random-access memory , B-tree performance depends not only on how
much computing time the dynamic-set operations consume but also on how
many disk accesses they perform. For each B-tree operation, the number of
disk accesses increases with the height of the B-tree, but B-tree operations
keep the height low .
Chapter 19  examines data structures for disjoint sets. Starting with a
universe of n  elements, each initially in its own singleton set, the operation
U NION  unites two sets. At all times, the n  elements are partitioned into
disjoint sets, even as calls to the U NION  operation change the members of a
set dynamically . The query F IND -S ET  identifies the unique set that contains
a given element at the moment. Representing each set as a simple rooted
Page number: 575
tree yields surprisingly fast operations: a sequence of m  operations runs in
O ( mα ( n )) time, where α ( n ) is an incredibly slowly growing function— α ( n )
is at most 4 in any conceivable application. The amortized analysis that
proves this time bound is as complex as the data structure is simple.
The topics covered in this part are by no means the only examples of
“advanced” data structures. Other advanced data structures include the
following:
Fibonacci heaps  [ 156 ] implement mer geable heaps (see Problem 10-
2 on page 268) with the operations I NSER T , M INIMUM , and U NION
taking only O (1) actual and amortized time, and the operations
E XTRACT -M IN  and D ELETE  taking O (lg n ) amortized time. The most
significant advantage of these data structures, however , is that
D ECREASE -K EY  takes only O (1) amortized time. Strict Fibonacci
heaps  [ 73 ], developed later , made all of these time bounds actual.
Because the D ECREASE -K EY  operation takes constant amortized time,
(strict) Fibonacci heaps constitute key components of some of the
asymptotically fastest algorithms to date for graph problems.
Dynamic trees  [ 415 , 429 ] maintain a forest of disjoint rooted trees.
Each edge in each tree has a real-valued cost. Dynamic trees support
queries to find parents, roots, edge costs, and the minimum edge cost
on a simple path from a node up to a root. T rees may be manipulated
by cutting edges, updating all edge costs on a simple path from a
node up to a root, linking a root into another tree, and making a node
the root of the tree it appears in. One implementation of dynamic
trees gives an O (lg n ) amortized time bound for each operation, while
a more complicated implementation yields O (lg n ) worst-case time
bounds. Dynamic trees are used in some of the asymptotically fastest
network-flow algorithms.
Splay trees  [ 418 , 429 ] are a form of binary search tree on which the
standard search-tree operations run in O (lg n ) amortized time. One
application of splay trees simplifies dynamic trees.
Persistent  data structures allow queries, and sometimes updates as
well, on past versions of a data structure. For example, linked data
structures can be made persistent with only a small time and space
Page number: 576
cost [ 126 ]. Problem 13-1 gives a simple example of a persistent
dynamic set.
Several data structures allow a faster implementation of dictionary
operations (I NSER T , D ELETE , and S EARCH ) for a restricted universe of
keys. By taking advantage of these restrictions, they are able to
achieve better worst-case asymptotic running times than comparison-
based data structures. If the keys are unique integers drawn from the
set {0, 1, 2, … , u  − 1}, where u  is an exact power of 2, then a
recursive data structure known as a van Emde Boas tree  [ 440 , 441 ]
supports each of the operations S EARCH , I NSER T , D ELETE , M INIMUM ,
M AXIMUM , S UCCESSOR , and P REDECESSOR  in O (lg lg u ) time. Fusion
trees  [ 157 ] were the first data structure to allow faster dictionary
operations when the universe is restricted to integers, implementing
these operations in O (lg n /lg lg n ) time. Several subsequent data
structures, including exponential search trees  [ 17 ], have also given
improved bounds on some or all of the dictionary operations and are
mentioned in the chapter notes throughout this book.
Dynamic graph data structures  support various queries while
allowing the structure of a graph to change through operations that
insert or delete vertices or edges. Examples of the queries that they
support include vertex connectivity [ 214 ], edge connectivity ,
minimum spanning trees [ 213 ], biconnectivity , and transitive closure
[ 212 ].
Chapter notes throughout this book mention additional data structures.
Page number: 577
17        Augmenting Data Structur es
Some solutions require no more than a “textbook” data structure—such as a
doubly linked list, a hash table, or a binary search tree—but many others
require a dash of creativity . Rarely will you need to create an entirely new
type of data structure, though. More often, you can augment a textbook data
structure by storing additional information in it. Y ou can then program new
operations for the data structure to support your application. Augmenting a
data structure is not always straightforward, however , since the added
information must be updated and maintained by the ordinary operations on
the data structure.
This chapter discusses two data structures based on red-black trees that
are augmented with additional information. Section 17.1  describes a data
structure that supports general order -statistic operations on a dynamic set:
quickly finding the i th smallest number or the rank of a given element.
Section 17.2  abstracts the process of augmenting a data structure and
provides a theorem that you can use when augmenting red-black trees.
Section 17.3  uses this theorem to help design a data structure for
maintaining a dynamic set of intervals, such as time intervals. Y ou can use
this data structure to quickly find an interval that overlaps a given query
interval.
17.1    Dynamic order statistics
Chapter 9  introduced the notion of an order statistic. Specifically , the i th
order statistic of a set of n  elements, where i  ∈  {1, 2, … , n }, is simply the
element in the set with the i th smallest key . In Chapter 9 , you saw how to
Page number: 578
determine any order statistic in O ( n ) time from an unordered set. This
section shows how to modify red-black trees so that you can determine any
order statistic for a dynamic set in O (lg n ) time and also compute the rank
of an element—its position in the linear order of the set—in O (lg n ) time.
Figur e 17.1  An order -statistic tree, which is an augmented red-black tree. In addition to its usual
attributes, each node x  has an attribute x . size , which is the number of nodes, other than the sentinel, in
the subtree rooted at x .
Figure 17.1  shows a data structure that can support fast order -statistic
operations. An order-statistic tree  T  is simply a red-black tree with
additional information stored in each node. Each node x  contains the usual
red-black tree attributes x . key , x . color , x . p , x . left , and x . right , along with a
new attribute, x . size . This attribute contains the number of internal nodes in
the subtree rooted at x  (including x  itself, but not including any sentinels),
that is, the size of the subtree. If we define the sentinel’ s size to be 0—that
is, we set T . nil . size  to be 0—then we have the identity
x . size  = x . left . size  + x . right . size  + 1.
Keys need not be distinct in an order -statistic tree. For example, the tree
in Figure 17.1  has two keys with value 14 and two keys with value 21.
When equal keys are present, the above notion of rank is not well defined.
W e remove this ambiguity for an order -statistic tree by defining the rank of
an element as the position at which it would be printed in an inorder walk of
the tree. In Figure 17.1 , for example, the key 14 stored in a black node has
rank 5, and the key 14 stored in a red node has rank 6.
Retrieving the element with a given rank
Before we show how to maintain the size information during insertion and
deletion, let’ s see how to implement two order -statistic queries that use this
Page number: 579
additional information. W e begin with an operation that retrieves the
element with a given rank. The procedure OS-S ELECT ( x , i ) on the following
page returns a pointer to the node containing the i th smallest key in the
subtree rooted at x . T o find the node with the i th smallest key in an order -
statistic tree T , call OS-S ELECT ( T . r oot , i ).
Here is how OS-S ELECT  works. Line 1 computes r , the rank of node x
within the subtree rooted at x . The value of x . left . size  is the number of nodes
that come before x  in an inorder tree walk of the subtree rooted at x . Thus,
x . left . size  + 1 is the rank of x  within the subtree rooted at x . If i  = r , then
node x  is the i th smallest element, and so line 3 returns x . If i < r , then the
i th smallest element resides in x ’ s left subtree, and therefore, line 5 recurses
on x . left . If i > r , then the i th smallest element resides in x ’ s right subtree.
Since the subtree rooted at x  contains r  elements that come before x ’ s right
subtree in an inorder tree walk, the i th smallest element in the subtree
rooted at x  is the ( i  − r )th smallest element in the subtree rooted at x . right .
Line 6 determines this element recursively .
OS-S ELECT ( x , i )
1 r  = x . left . size  + 1 //  rank of x  within the subtree rooted at x
2 if  i  == r
3 r eturn  x
4 elseif  i  < r
5 r eturn  OS-S ELECT ( x . left , i )
6 else r eturn  OS-S ELECT ( x . right , i  − r )
As an example of how OS-S ELECT  operates, consider a search for the
17th smallest element in the order -statistic tree of Figure 17.1 . The search
starts with x  as the root, whose key is 26, and with i  = 17. Since the size of
26’ s left subtree is 12, its rank is 13. Thus, the node with rank 17 is the 17 −
13 = 4th smallest element in 26’ s right subtree. In the recursive call, x  is the
node with key 41, and i  = 4. Since the size of 41’ s left subtree is 5, its rank
within its subtree is 6. Therefore, the node with rank 4 is the 4th smallest
element in 41’ s left subtree. In the recursive call, x  is the node with key 30,
and its rank within its subtree is 2. The procedure recurses once again to
find the 4 − 2 = 2nd smallest element in the subtree rooted at the node with
key 38. Its left subtree has size 1, which means it is the second smallest
element. Thus, the procedure returns a pointer to the node with key 38.
Page number: 580
Because each recursive call goes down one level in the order -statistic
tree, the total time for OS-S ELECT  is at worst proportional to the height of
the tree. Since the tree is a red-black tree, its height is O (lg n ), where n  is
the number of nodes. Thus, the running time of OS-S ELECT  is O (lg n ) for a
dynamic set of n  elements.
Determining the rank of an element
Given a pointer to a node x  in an order -statistic tree T , the procedure OS-
R ANK  on the facing page returns the position of x  in the linear order
determined by an inorder tree walk of T .
OS-R ANK ( T , x )
1 r  = x . left . size  + 1 //  rank of x  within the subtree rooted at x
2 y  = x //  root of subtree being examined
3 while  y  ≠ T . r oot
4 if  y  == y . p . right  //  if root of a right subtree …
5 r  = r  + y . p . left . size  + 1  //  … add in parent and its left subtree
6 y  = y . p  //  move y  toward the root
7 r eturn  r
The OS-R ANK  procedure works as follows. Y ou can think of node x ’ s
rank as the number of nodes preceding x  in an inorder tree walk, plus 1 for x
itself. OS-R ANK  maintains the following loop invariant:
At the start of each iteration of the while  loop of lines 3–6, r  is the
rank of x . key  in the subtree rooted at node y .
W e use this loop invariant to show that OS-R ANK  works correctly as
follows:
Initialization:  Prior to the first iteration, line 1 sets r  to be the rank of x . key
within the subtree rooted at x . Setting y  = x  in line 2 makes the invariant
true the first time the test in line 3 executes.
Maintenance:  At the end of each iteration of the while  loop, line 6 sets y  =
y . p . Thus, we must show that if r  is the rank of x . key  in the subtree rooted
at y  at the start of the loop body , then r  is the rank of x . key  in the subtree
rooted at y . p  at the end of the loop body . In each iteration of the while
loop, consider the subtree rooted at y . p . The value of r  already includes
the number of nodes in the subtree rooted at node y  that precede x  in an
Page number: 581
inorder walk, and so the procedure must add the nodes in the subtree
rooted at y ’ s sibling that precede x  in an inorder walk, plus 1 for y . p  if it,
too, precedes x . If y  is a left child, then neither y . p  nor any node in y . p ’ s
right subtree precedes x , and so OS-R ANK  leaves r  alone. Otherwise, y  is a
right child and all the nodes in y . p ’ s left subtree precede x , as does y . p
itself. In this case, line 5 adds y . p . left . size  + 1 to the current value of r .
T ermination:  Because each iteration of the loop moves y  toward the root
and the loop terminates when y  = T . r oot , the loop eventually terminates.
Moreover , the subtree rooted at y  is the entire tree. Thus, the value of r  is
the rank of x . key  in the entire tree.
As an example, when OS-R ANK  runs on the order -statistic tree of Figure
17.1  to find the rank of the node with key 38, the following sequence of
values of y . key  and r  occurs at the top of the while  loop:
iteration y . key r
1 38 2
2 30 4
3 41 4
4 26 17
The procedure returns the rank 17.
Since each iteration of the while  loop takes O (1) time, and y  goes up one
level in the tree with each iteration, the running time of OS-R ANK  is at
worst proportional to the height of the tree: O (lg n ) on an n -node order -
statistic tree.
Maintaining subtr ee sizes
Given the size  attribute in each node, OS-S ELECT  and OS-R ANK  can quickly
compute order -statistic information. But if the basic modifying operations
on red-black trees cannot ef ficiently maintain the size  attribute, our work
will have been for naught. Let’ s see how to maintain subtree sizes for both
insertion and deletion without af fecting the asymptotic running time of
either operation.
Recall from Section 13.3  that insertion into a red-black tree consists of
two phases. The first phase goes down the tree from the root, inserting the
new node as a child of an existing node. The second phase goes up the tree,
changing colors and performing rotations to maintain the red-black
properties.
Page number: 582
T o maintain the subtree sizes in the first phase, simply increment x . size
for each node x  on the simple path traversed from the root down toward the
leaves. The new node added gets a size  of 1. Since there are O (lg n ) nodes
on the traversed path, the additional cost of maintaining the size  attributes is
O (lg n ).
In the second phase, the only structural changes to the underlying red-
black tree are caused by rotations, of which there are at most two.
Moreover , a rotation is a local operation: only two nodes have their size
attributes invalidated. The link around which the rotation is performed is
incident on these two nodes. Referring to the code for L EFT -R OT A TE ( T , x ) on
page 336, add the following lines:
13 y . size  = x . size
14 x . size  = x . left . size  + x . right . size  + 1
Figure 17.2  illustrates how the attributes are updated. The change to R IGHT -
R OT A TE  is symmetric.
Since inserting into a red-black tree requires at most two rotations,
updating the size  attributes in the second phase costs only O (1) additional
time. Thus, the total time for insertion into an n -node order -statistic tree is
O (lg n ), which is asymptotically the same as for an ordinary red-black tree.
Figur e 17.2  Updating subtree sizes during rotations. The updates are local, requiring only the size
information stored in x , y , and the roots of the subtrees shown as triangles.
Deletion from a red-black tree also consists of two phases: the first
operates on the underlying search tree, and the second causes at most three
rotations and otherwise performs no structural changes. (See Section 13.4 .)
The first phase removes one node z  from the tree and could move at most
two other nodes within the tree (nodes y  and x  in Figure 12.4  on page 323).
T o update the subtree sizes, simply traverse a simple path from the lowest
node that moves (starting from its original position within the tree) up to the
Page number: 583
root, decrementing the size  attribute of each node on the path. Since this
path has length O (lg n ) in an n -node red-black tree, the additional time
spent maintaining size  attributes in the first phase is O (lg n ). For the O (1)
rotations in the second phase of deletion, handle them in the same manner
as for insertion. Thus, both insertion and deletion, including maintaining the
size  attributes, take O (lg n ) time for an n -node order -statistic tree.
Exer cises
17.1-1
Show how OS-S ELECT ( T . r oot , 10) operates on the red-black tree T  shown in
Figure 17.1 .
17.1-2
Show how OS-R ANK ( T , x ) operates on the red-black tree T  shown in Figure
17.1  and the node x  with x . key  = 35.
17.1-3
W rite a nonrecursive version of OS-S ELECT .
17.1-4
W rite a procedure OS-K EY -R ANK ( T , k ) that takes an order -statistic tree T
and a key k  and returns the rank of k  in the dynamic set represented by T .
Assume that the keys of T  are distinct.
17.1-5
Given an element x  in an n -node order -statistic tree and a natural number i ,
show how to determine the i th successor of x  in the linear order of the tree
in O (lg n ) time.
17.1-6
The procedures OS-S ELECT  and OS-R ANK  use the size  attribute of a node
only to compute a rank. Suppose that you store in each node its rank in the
subtree of which it is the root instead of the size  attribute. Show how to
maintain this information during insertion and deletion. (Remember that
these two operations can cause rotations.)
17.1-7
Page number: 584
Show how to use an order -statistic tree to count the number of inversions
(see Problem 2-4 on page 47) in an array of n  distinct elements in O ( n  lg n )
time.
★  17.1-8
Consider n  chords on a circle, each defined by its endpoints. Describe an
O ( n  lg n )-time algorithm to determine the number of pairs of chords that
intersect inside the circle. (For example, if the n  chords are all diameters
that meet at the center , then the answer is 
 .) Assume that no two chords
share an endpoint.
17.2    How to augment a data structur e
The process of augmenting a basic data structure to support additional
functionality occurs quite frequently in algorithm design. W e’ll use it again
in the next section to design a data structure that supports operations on
intervals. This section examines the steps involved in such augmentation. It
includes a useful theorem that allows you to augment red-black trees easily
in many cases.
Y ou can break the process of augmenting a data structure into four steps:
1 . Choose an underlying data structure.
2 . Determine additional information to maintain in the underlying data
structure.
3 . V erify that you can maintain the additional information for the basic
modifying operations on the underlying data structure.
4 . Develop new operations.
As with any prescriptive design method, you’ll rarely be able to follow the
steps precisely in the order given. Most design work contains an element of
trial and error , and progress on all steps usually proceeds in parallel. There
is no point, for example, in determining additional information and
developing new operations (steps 2 and 4) if you cannot maintain the
additional information ef ficiently . Nevertheless, this four -step method
provides a good focus for your ef forts in augmenting a data structure, and it
is also a good framework for documenting an augmented data structure.
Page number: 585
W e followed these four steps in Section 17.1  to design order -statistic
trees. For step 1, we chose red-black trees as the underlying data structure.
Red-black trees seemed like a good starting point because they ef ficiently
support other dynamic-set operations on a total order , such as M INIMUM ,
M AXIMUM , S UCCESSOR , and P REDECESSOR .
In Step 2, we added the size  attribute, so that each node x  stores the size
of the subtree rooted at x . Generally , the additional information makes
operations more ef ficient. For example, it is possible to implement OS-
S ELECT  and OS-R ANK  using just the keys stored in the tree, but then they
would not run in O (lg n ) time. Sometimes, the additional information is
pointer information rather than data, as in Exercise 17.2-1.
For step 3, we ensured that insertion and deletion can maintain the size
attributes while still running in O (lg n ) time. Ideally , you would like to
update only a few elements of the data structure in order to maintain the
additional information. For example, if each node simply stores its rank in
the tree, the OS-S ELECT  and OS-R ANK  procedures run quickly , but inserting
a new minimum element might cause a change to this information in every
node of the tree. Because we chose to store subtree sizes instead, inserting a
new element causes information to change in only O (lg n ) nodes.
In Step 4, we developed the operations OS-S ELECT  and OS-R ANK . After
all, the need for new operations is why anyone bothers to augment a data
structure in the first place. Occasionally , rather than developing new
operations, you can use the additional information to expedite existing ones,
as in Exercise 17.2-1.
Augmenting r ed-black tr ees
When red-black trees underlie an augmented data structure, we can prove
that insertion and deletion can always ef ficiently maintain certain kinds of
additional information, thereby simplifying step 3. The proof of the
following theorem is similar to the ar gument from Section 17.1  that we can
maintain the size  attribute for order -statistic trees.
Theorem 17.1 (Augmenting a red-black tree)
Let f  be an attribute that augments a red-black tree T  of n  nodes, and
suppose that the value of f  for each node x  depends only the information in
nodes x , x . left , and x . right  (possibly including x . left . f  and x . right . f ), and that
the value of x . f  can be computed from this information in O (1) time. Then,
Page number: 586
the insertion and deletion operations can maintain the values of f  in all
nodes of T  without asymptotically af fecting the O (lg n ) running times of
these operations.
Proof    The main idea of the proof is that a change to an f  attribute in a node
x  propagates only to ancestors of x  in the tree. That is, changing x . f  may
require x . p . f  to be updated, but nothing else; updating x . p . f  may require
x . p . p . f  to be updated, but nothing else; and so on up the tree. After updating
T . r oot . f , no other node depends on the new value, and so the process
terminates. Since the height of a red-black tree is O (lg n ), changing an f
attribute in a node costs O (lg n ) time in updating all nodes that depend on
the change.
As we saw in Section 13.3 , insertion of a node x  into red-black tree T
consists of two phases. If the tree T  is empty , then the first phase simply
makes x  be the root of T . If T  is not empty , then the first phase inserts x  as a
child of an existing node. Because we assume that the value of x . f  depends
only on information in the other attributes of x  itself and the information in
x ’ s children, and because x ’ s children are both the sentinel T . nil , it takes
only O (1) time to compute the value of x . f . Having computed x . f , the change
propagates up the tree. Thus, the total time for the first phase of insertion is
O (lg n ). During the second phase, the only structural changes to the tree
come from rotations. Since only two nodes change in a rotation, but a
change to an attribute might need to propagate up to the root, the total time
for updating the f  attributes is O (lg n ) per rotation. Since the number of
rotations during insertion is at most two, the total time for insertion is O (lg
n ).
Like insertion, deletion has two phases, as Section 13.4  discusses. In the
first phase, changes to the tree occur when a node is deleted, and at most
two other nodes could move within the tree. Propagating the updates to f
caused by these changes costs at most O (lg n ), since the changes modify the
tree locally along a simple path from the lowest changed node to the root.
Fixing up the red-black tree during the second phase requires at most three
rotations, and each rotation requires at most O (lg n ) time to propagate the
updates to f . Thus, like insertion, the total time for deletion is O (lg n ).
▪
In many cases, such as maintaining the size  attributes in order -statistic
trees, the cost of updating after a rotation is O (1), rather than the O (lg n )
Page number: 587
derived in the proof of Theorem 17.1. Exercise 17.2-3 gives an example.
On the other hand, when an update after a rotation requires a traversal
all the way up to the root, it is important that insertion into and deletion
from a red-black tree require a constant number of rotations. The chapter
notes for Chapter 13  list other schemes for balancing search trees that do
not bound the number of rotations per insertion or deletion by a constant. If
each operation might require Θ(lg n ) rotations and each rotation traverses a
path up to the root, then a single operation could require Θ(lg2n ) time,
rather than the O (lg n ) time bound given by Theorem 17.1.
Exer cises
17.2-1
Show , by adding pointers to the nodes, how to support each of the dynamic-
set queries M INIMUM , M AXIMUM , S UCCESSOR , and P REDECESSOR  in O (1)
worst-case time on an augmented order -statistic tree. The asymptotic
performance of other operations on order -statistic trees should not be
af fected.
17.2-2
Can you maintain the black-heights of nodes in a red-black tree as attributes
in the nodes of the tree without af fecting the asymptotic performance of any
of the red-black tree operations? Show how , or ar gue why not. How about
maintaining the depths of nodes?
17.2-3
Let ⊗  be an associative binary operator , and let a  be an attribute maintained
in each node of a red-black tree. Suppose that you want to include in each
node x  an additional attribute f  such that x . f  = x1 . a  ⊗  x2 . a  ⊗  … ⊗  xm . a ,
where x1 , x2 , … , xm  is the inorder listing of nodes in the subtree rooted at x .
Show how to update the f  attributes in O (1) time after a rotation. Modify
your ar gument slightly to apply it to the size  attributes in order -statistic
trees.
17.3    Interval tr ees
Page number: 588
This section shows how to augment red-black trees to support operations on
dynamic sets of intervals. In this section, we’ll assume that intervals are
closed. Extending the results to open and half-open intervals is conceptually
straightforward. (See page 1 157 for definitions of closed, open, and half-
open intervals.)
Intervals are convenient for representing events that each occupy a
continuous period of time. For example, you could query a database of time
intervals to find out which events occurred during a given interval. The data
structure in this section provides an ef ficient means for maintaining such an
interval database.
A simple way to represent an interval [ t1 , t2 ] is as an object i  with
attributes i . low  = t1  (the low endpoint ) and i . high  = t2  (the high endpoint ).
W e say that intervals i  and i ′ overlap  if i  ∩ i ′ ≠ ∅ , that is, if i . low  ≤ i ′. high
and i ′. low  ≤ i . high .
Figur e 17.3  The interval trichotomy for two closed intervals i  and i ′. (a)  If i  and i ′ overlap, there are
four situations, and in each, i . low  ≤ i ′. high  and i ′. low  ≤ i . high . (b)  The intervals do not overlap, and
i . high < i ′. low . (c)  The intervals do not overlap, and i ′. high < i . low .
As Figure 17.3  shows, any two intervals i  and i ′ satisfy the interval
trichotomy , that is, exactly one of the following three properties holds:
a. i  and i ′ overlap,
b. i  is to the left of i ′ (i.e., i . high  < i ′. low ),
c. i  is to the right of i ′ (i.e., i ′. high  < i . low ).
An interval tree  is a red-black tree that maintains a dynamic set of
elements, with each element x  containing an interval x . int . Interval trees
support the following operations:
Page number: 589
I NTER V AL -I NSER T ( T , x ) adds the element x , whose int  attribute is assumed to
contain an interval, to the interval tree T .
I NTER V AL -D ELETE ( T , x ) removes the element x  from the interval tree T .
I NTER V AL -S EARCH ( T , i ) returns a pointer to an element x  in the interval tree
T  such that x . int  overlaps interval i , or a pointer to the sentinel T . nil  if no
such element belongs to the set.
Figure 17.4  shows how an interval tree represents a set of intervals. The
four -step method from Section 17.2  will guide our design of an interval tree
and the operations that run on it.
Step 1: Underlying data structur e
A red-black tree serves as the underlying data structure. Each node x
contains an interval x . int . The key of x  is the low endpoint, x . int . low , of the
interval. Thus, an inorder tree walk of the data structure lists the intervals in
sorted order by low endpoint.
Page number: 590
Figur e 17.4  An interval tree. (a)  A set of 10 intervals, shown sorted bottom to top by left endpoint.
(b)  The interval tree that represents them. Each node x  contains an interval, shown above the dashed
line, and the maximum value of any interval endpoint in the subtree rooted at x , shown below the
dashed line. An inorder tree walk of the tree lists the nodes in sorted order by left endpoint.
Step 2: Additional information
In addition to the intervals themselves, each node x  contains a value x . max ,
which is the maximum value of any interval endpoint stored in the subtree
rooted at x .
Step 3: Maintaining the information
W e must verify that insertion and deletion take O (lg n ) time on an interval
tree of n  nodes. It is simple enough to determine x . max  in O (1) time, given
interval x . int  and the max  values of node x ’ s children:
Page number: 591
x . max  = max { x . int . high , x . left . max , x . right . max }.
Thus, by Theorem 17.1, insertion and deletion run in O (lg n ) time. In fact,
you can use either Exercise 17.2-3 or 17.3-1 to show how to update all the
max  attributes that change after a rotation in just O (1) time.
Step 4: Developing new operations
The only new operation is I NTER V AL -S EARCH ( T , i ), which finds a node in
tree T  whose interval overlaps interval i . If there is no interval in the tree
that overlaps i , the procedure returns a pointer to the sentinel T . nil .
I NTER V AL -S EARCH ( T , i )
1 x  = T . r oot
2 while  x  ≠ T . nil  and i  does not overlap x . int
3 if  x . left  ≠ T . nil  and x . left . max  ≥ i . low
4 x  = x . left //  overlap in left subtree or no overlap in right subtree
5 else  x  = x . right //  no overlap in left subtree
6 r eturn  x
The search for an interval that overlaps i  starts at the root of the tree and
proceeds downward. It terminates when either it finds an overlapping
interval or it reaches the sentinel T . nil . Since each iteration of the basic loop
takes O (1) time, and since the height of an n -node red-black tree is O (lg n ),
the I NTER V AL -S EARCH  procedure takes O (lg n ) time.
Before we see why I NTER V AL -S EARCH  is correct, let’ s examine how it
works on the interval tree in Figure 17.4 . Let’ s look for an interval that
overlaps the interval i  = [22, 25]. Begin with x  as the root, which contains
[16, 21] and does not overlap i . Since x . left . max  = 23 is greater than i . low  =
22, the loop continues with x  as the left child of the root—the node
containing [8, 9], which also does not overlap i . This time, x . left . max  = 10 is
less than i . low  = 22, and so the loop continues with the right child of x  as
the new x . Because the interval [15, 23] stored in this node overlaps i , the
procedure returns this node.
Now let’ s try an unsuccessful search, for an interval that overlaps i  =
[1 1, 14] in the interval tree of Figure 17.4 . Again, begin with x  as the root.
Since the root’ s interval [16, 21] does not overlap i , and since x . left . max  =
23 is greater than i . low  = 1 1, go left to the node containing [8, 9]. Interval
[8, 9] does not overlap i , and x . left . max  = 10 is less than i . low  = 1 1, and so
Page number: 592
the search goes right. (No interval in the left subtree overlaps i .) Interval
[15, 23] does not overlap i , and its left child is T . nil , so again the search
goes right, the loop terminates, and I NTER V AL -S EARCH  returns the sentinel
T . nil .
T o see why I NTER V AL -S EARCH  is correct, we must understand why it
suf fices to examine a single path from the root. The basic idea is that at any
node x , if x . int  does not overlap i , the search always proceeds in a safe
direction: the search will definitely find an overlapping interval if the tree
contains one. The following theorem states this property more precisely .
Theorem 17.2
Any execution of I NTER V AL -S EARCH ( T , i ) either returns a node whose
interval overlaps i , or it returns T . nil  and the tree T  contains no node whose
interval overlaps i .
Proof    The while  loop of lines 2–5 terminates when either x  = T . nil  or i
overlaps x . int . In the latter case, it is certainly correct to return x . Therefore,
we focus on the former case, in which the while  loop terminates because x
= T . nil , which is the node that I NTER V AL -S EARCH  returns.
W e’ll prove that if the procedure returns T . nil , then it did not miss any
intervals in T  that overlap i . The idea is to show that whether the search
goes left in line 4 or right in line 5, it always heads toward a node
containing an interval overlapping i , if any such interval exists. In
particular , we’ll prove that
1 . If the search goes left in line 4, then the left subtree of node x
contains an interval that overlaps i  or the right subtree of x  contains
no interval that overlaps i . Therefore, even if x ’ s left subtree
contains no interval that overlaps i  but the search goes left, it does
not make a mistake, because x ’ s right subtree does not contain an
interval overlapping i , either .
2 . If the search goes right in line 5, then the left subtree of x  contains
no interval that overlaps i . Thus, if the search goes right, it does not
make a mistake.
For both cases, we rely on the interval trichotomy . Let’ s start with the
case where the search goes right, whose proof is simpler . By the tests in line
3, we know that x . left  = T . nil  or x . left . max < i . low . If x . left  = T . nil , then x ’ s
Page number: 593
left subtree contains no interval that overlaps i , since it contains no intervals
at all. Now suppose that x . left  ≠ T . nil , so that we must have x . left . max <
i . low . Consider any interval i ′ in x ’ s left subtree. Because x . left . max  is the
maximum endpoint in x ’ s left subtree, we have i ′. high  ≤ x . left . max . Thus, as
Figure 17.5(a)  shows,
i ′. high ≤ x . left . max
< i . low .
By the interval trichotomy , therefore, intervals i  and i ′ do not overlap, and
so x ’ s left subtree contains no interval that overlaps i .
Figur e 17.5  Intervals in the proof of Theorem 17.2. The value of x . left . max  is shown in each case as
a dashed line. (a)  The search goes right. No interval i ′ in x ’ s left subtree can overlap i . (b)  The search
goes left. The left subtree of x  contains an interval that overlaps i  (situation not shown), or x ’ s left
subtree contains an interval i ′ such that i ′. high  = x . left . max . Since i  does not overlap i ′, neither does it
overlap any interval i ″ in x ’ s right subtree, since i ′. low  ≤ i ″. low .
Now we examine the case in which the search goes left. If the left
subtree of node x  contains an interval that overlaps i , we’re done, so let’ s
assume that no node in x ’ s left subtree overlaps i . W e need to show that in
this case, no node in x ’ s right subtree overlaps i , so that going left will not
miss any overlaps in x ’ s right subtree. By the tests in line 3, the left subtree
of x  is not empty and x . left . max  ≥ i . low . By the definition of the max
attribute, x ’ s left subtree contains some interval i ′ such that
i ′. high = x . left . max
≥ i . low ,
as illustrated in Figure 17.5(b) . Since i ′ is in x ’ s left subtree, it does not
overlap i , and since i ′. high  ≥ i . low , the interval trichotomy tells us that
i . high < i ′. low . Now we bring in the property that interval trees are keyed
on the low endpoints of intervals. Because i ′ is in x ’ s left subtree, we have
Page number: 594
i ′. low  ≤ x . int . low . Now consider any interval i ″ in x ’ s right subtree, so that
x . int . low  ≤ i ″. low . Putting inequalities together , we get
i . high < i ′. low
≤ x . int . low
≤ i ″. low .
Because i . high < i ″. low , the interval trichotomy tells us that i  and i ″ do not
overlap. Since we chose i ″ as any interval in x ’ s right subtree, no node in x ’ s
right subtree overlaps i .
▪
Thus, the I NTER V AL -S EARCH  procedure works correctly .
Exer cises
17.3-1
W rite pseudocode for L EFT -R OT A TE  that operates on nodes in an interval
tree and updates all the max  attributes that change in O (1) time.
17.3-2
Describe an ef ficient algorithm that, given an interval i , returns an interval
overlapping i  that has the minimum low endpoint, or T . nil  if no such
interval exists.
17.3-3
Given an interval tree T  and an interval i , describe how to list all intervals in
T  that overlap i  in O (min { n , k  lg n }) time, where k  is the number of
intervals in the output list. ( Hint : One simple method makes several queries,
modifying the tree between queries. A slightly more complicated method
does not modify the tree.)
17.3-4
Suggest modifications to the interval-tree procedures to support the new
operation I NTER V AL -S EARCH -E XACTL Y ( T , i ), where T  is an interval tree and i
is an interval. The operation should return a pointer to a node x  in T  such
that x . int . low  = i . low  and x . int . high  = i . high , or T . nil  if T  contains no such
node. All operations, including I NTER V AL -S EARCH -E XACTL Y , should run in
O (lg n ) time on an n -node interval tree.
Page number: 595
17.3-5
Show how to maintain a dynamic set Q  of numbers that supports the
operation M IN -G AP , which gives the absolute value of the dif ference of the
two closest numbers in Q . For example, if we have Q  = {1, 5, 9, 15, 18,
22}, then M IN -G AP ( Q ) returns 3, since 15 and 18 are the two closest
numbers in Q . Make the operations I NSER T , D ELETE , S EARCH , and M IN -G AP
as ef ficient as possible, and analyze their running times.
★  17.3-6
VLSI databases commonly represent an integrated circuit as a list of
rectangles. Assume that each rectangle is rectilinearly oriented (sides
parallel to the x - and y -axes), so that each rectangle is represented by four
values: its minimum and maximum x - and y -coordinates. Give an O ( n  lg n )-
time algorithm to decide whether a set of n  rectangles so represented
contains two rectangles that overlap. Y our algorithm need not report all
intersecting pairs, but it must report that an overlap exists if one rectangle
entirely covers another , even if the boundary lines do not intersect. ( Hint :
Move a “sweep” line across the set of rectangles.)
Pr oblems
17-1     Point of maximum overlap
Y ou wish to keep track of a point of maximum overlap  in a set of intervals
—a point with the lar gest number of intervals in the set that overlap it.
a.  Show that there is always a point of maximum overlap that is an endpoint
of one of the intervals.
b.  Design a data structure that ef ficiently supports the operations I NTER V AL -
I NSER T , I NTER V AL -D ELETE , and F IND -POM, which returns a point of
maximum overlap. ( Hint : Keep a red-black tree of all the endpoints.
Associate a value of +1 with each left endpoint, and associate a value of
−1 with each right endpoint. Augment each node of the tree with some
extra information to maintain the point of maximum overlap.)
17-2     Josephus permutation
Page number: 596
W e define the Josephus problem  as follows. A group of n  people form a
circle, and we are given a positive integer m  ≤ n . Beginning with a
designated first person, proceed around the circle, removing every m th
person. After each person is removed, counting continues around the circle
that remains. This process continues until nobody remains in the circle. The
order in which the people are removed from the circle defines the ( n , m )-
Josephus permutation  of the integers 1, 2, … , n . For example, the (7, 3)-
Josephus permutation is 〈 3, 6, 2, 7, 5, 1, 4 〉 .
a.  Suppose that m  is a constant. Describe an O ( n )-time algorithm that, given
an integer n , outputs the ( n , m )-Josephus permutation.
b.  Suppose that m  is not necessarily a constant. Describe an O ( n  lg n )-time
algorithm that, given integers n  and m , outputs the ( n , m )-Josephus
permutation.
Chapter notes
In their book, Preparata and Shamos [ 364 ] describe several of the interval
trees that appear in the literature, citing work by H. Edelsbrunner (1980)
and E. M. McCreight (1981). The book details an interval tree that, given a
static database of n  intervals, allows us to enumerate all k  intervals that
overlap a given query interval in O ( k  + lg n ) time.
Page number: 597
18        B-T r ees
B-trees are balanced search trees designed to work well on disk drives or
other direct-access secondary storage devices. B-trees are similar to red-
black trees ( Chapter 13 ), but they are better at minimizing the number of
operations that access disks. (W e often say just “disk” instead of “disk
drive.”) Many database systems use B-trees, or variants of B-trees, to store
information.
B-trees dif fer from red-black trees in that B-tree nodes may have many
children, from a few to thousands. That is, the “branching factor” of a B-
tree can be quite lar ge, although it usually depends on characteristics of the
disk drive used. B-trees are similar to red-black trees in that every n -node
B-tree has height O (lg n ), so that B-trees can implement many dynamic-set
operations in O (lg n ) time. But a B-tree has a lar ger branching factor than a
red-black tree, so the base of the logarithm that expresses its height is
lar ger , and hence its height can be considerably lower .
B-trees generalize binary search trees in a natural manner . Figure 18.1
shows a simple B-tree. If an internal B-tree node x  contains x . n  keys, then x
has x . n  + 1 children. The keys in node x  serve as dividing points separating
the range of keys handled by x  into x . n  + 1 subranges, each handled by one
child of x . A search for a key in a B-tree makes an ( x . n  + 1)-way decision
based on comparisons with the x . n  keys stored at node x . An internal node
contains pointers to its children, but a leaf node does not.
Section 18.1  gives a precise definition of B-trees and proves that the
height of a B-tree grows only logarithmically with the number of nodes it
contains. Section 18.2  describes how to search for a key and insert a key
into a B-tree, and Section 18.3  discusses deletion. Before proceeding,
however , we need to ask why we evaluate data structures designed to work
Page number: 598
on a disk drive dif ferently from data structures designed to work in main
random-access memory .
Figur e 18.1  A B-tree whose keys are the consonants of English. An internal node x  containing x . n
keys has x . n  + 1 children. All leaves are at the same depth in the tree. The blue nodes are examined in
a search for the letter R .
Data structur es on secondary storage
Computer systems take advantage of various technologies that provide
memory capacity . The main memory  of a computer system normally
consists of silicon memory chips. This technology is typically more than an
order of magnitude more expensive per bit stored than magnetic storage
technology , such as tapes or disk drives. Most computer systems also have
secondary storage  based on solid-state drives (SSDs) or magnetic disk
drives. The amount of such secondary storage often exceeds the amount of
primary memory by one to two orders of magnitude. SSDs have faster
access times than magnetic disk drives, which are mechanical devices. In
recent years, SSD capacities have increased while their prices have
decreased. Magnetic disk drives typically have much higher capacities than
SSDs, and they remain a more cost-ef fective means for storing massive
amounts of information. Disk drives that store several terabytes1 can be
found for under $100.
Figure 18.2  shows a typical disk drive. The drive consists of one or more
platters , which rotate at a constant speed around a common spindle . A
magnetizable material covers the surface of each platter . The drive reads
and writes each platter by a head  at the end of an arm . The arms can move
their heads toward or away from the spindle. The surface that passes
underneath a given head when it is stationary is called a track .
Page number: 599
Although disk drives are cheaper and have higher capacity than main
memory , they are much, much slower because they have moving
mechanical parts. The mechanical motion has two components: platter
rotation and arm movement. As of this writing, commodity disk drives
rotate at speeds of 5400–15,000 revolutions per minute (RPM). T ypical
speeds are 15,000 RPM in server -grade drives, 7200 RPM in drives for
desktops, and 5400 RPM in drives for laptops. Although 7200 RPM may
seem fast, one rotation takes 8.33 milliseconds, which is over 5 orders of
magnitude longer than the 50 nanosecond access times (more or less)
commonly found for main memory . In other words, if a computer waits a
full rotation for a particular item to come under the read/write head, it could
access main memory more than 100,000 times during that span. The
average wait is only half a rotation, but still, the dif ference in access times
for main memory compared with disk drives is enormous. Moving the arms
also takes some time. As of this writing, average access times for
commodity disk drives are around 4 milliseconds.
Figur e 18.2  A typical magnetic disk drive. It consists of one or more platters covered with a
magnetizable material (two platters are shown here) that rotate around a spindle. Each platter is read
and written with a head, shown in red, at the end of an arm. Arms rotate around a common pivot axis.
A track, drawn in blue, is the surface that passes beneath the read/write head when the head is
stationary .
In order to amortize the time spent waiting for mechanical movements,
also known as latency , disk drives access not just one item but several at a
time. Information is divided into a number of equal-sized blocks  of bits that
appear consecutively within tracks, and each disk read or write is of one or
more entire blocks.2 T ypical disk drives have block sizes running from 512
Page number: 600
to 4096 bytes. Once the read/write head is positioned correctly and the
platter has rotated to the beginning of the desired block, reading or writing a
magnetic disk drive is entirely electronic (aside from the rotation of the
platter), and the disk drive can quickly read or write lar ge amounts of data.
Often, accessing a block of information and reading it from a disk drive
takes longer than processing all the information read. For this reason, in this
chapter we’ll look separately at the two principal components of the
running time:
the number of disk accesses, and
the CPU (computing) time.
W e measure the number of disk accesses in terms of the number of blocks
of information that need to be read from or written to the disk drive.
Although disk-access time is not constant—it depends on the distance
between the current track and the desired track and also on the initial
rotational position of the platters—the number of blocks read or written
provides a good first-order approximation of the total time spent accessing
the disk drive.
In a typical B-tree application, the amount of data handled is so lar ge
that all the data do not fit into main memory at once. The B-tree algorithms
copy selected blocks from disk into main memory as needed and write back
onto disk the blocks that have changed. B-tree algorithms keep only a
constant number of blocks in main memory at any time, and thus the size of
main memory does not limit the size of B-trees that can be handled.
B-tree procedures need to be able to read information from disk into
main memory and write information from main memory to disk. Consider
some object x . If x  is currently in the computer ’ s main memory , then the
code can refer to the attributes of x  as usual: x . key , for example. If x  resides
on disk, however , then the procedure must perform the operation D ISK -
R EAD ( x ) to read the block containing object x  into main memory before it
can refer to x ’ s attributes. (Assume that if x  is already in main memory , then
D ISK -R EAD ( x ) requires no disk accesses: it is a “no-op.”) Similarly ,
procedures call D ISK -W RITE ( x ) to save any changes that have been made to
the attributes of object x  by writing to disk the block containing x . Thus, the
typical pattern for working with an object is as follows:
Page number: 601
x  = a pointer to some object
D ISK -R EAD ( x )
operations that access and/or modify the attributes of x
D ISK -W RITE ( x ) //  omitted if no attributes of x  were changed
other operations that access but do not modify attributes of x
The system can keep only a limited number of blocks in main memory at
any one time. Our B-tree algorithms assume that the system automatically
flushes from main memory blocks that are no longer in use.
Since in most systems the running time of a B-tree algorithm depends
primarily on the number of D ISK -R EAD  and D ISK -W RITE  operations it
performs, we typically want each of these operations to read or write as
much information as possible. Thus, a B-tree node is usually as lar ge as a
whole disk block, and this size limits the number of children a B-tree node
can have.
Figur e 18.3  A B-tree of height 2 containing over one billion keys. Shown inside each node x  is x . n ,
the number of keys in x . Each internal node and leaf contains 1000 keys. This B-tree has 1001 nodes
at depth 1 and over one million leaves at depth 2.
Lar ge B-trees stored on disk drives often have branching factors
between 50 and 2000, depending on the size of a key relative to the size of a
block. A lar ge branching factor dramatically reduces both the height of the
tree and the number of disk accesses required to find any key . Figure 18.3
shows a B-tree with a branching factor of 1001 and height 2 that can store
over one billion keys. Nevertheless, if the root node is kept permanently in
main memory , at most two disk accesses suf fice to find any key in this tree.
18.1    Definition of B-tr ees
Page number: 602
T o keep things simple, let’ s assume, as we have for binary search trees and
red-black trees, that any satellite information associated with a key resides
in the same node as the key . In practice, you might actually store with each
key just a pointer to another disk block containing the satellite information
for that key . The pseudocode in this chapter implicitly assumes that the
satellite information associated with a key , or the pointer to such satellite
information, travels with the key whenever the key is moved from node to
node. A common variant on a B-tree, known as a B+- tree , stores all the
satellite information in the leaves and stores only keys and child pointers in
the internal nodes, thus maximizing the branching factor of the internal
nodes.
A B-tree  T  is a rooted tree with root T . r oot  having the following
properties:
1 . Every node x  has the following attributes:
a. x . n , the number of keys currently stored in node x ,
b. the x . n  keys themselves, x . key1 , x . key2 , … , x . keyx . n , stored in
monotonically increasing order , so that x . key1  ≤ x . key2  ≤ ⋯  ≤
x . keyx . n ,
c. x . leaf , a boolean value that is TRUE  if x  is a leaf and F ALSE  if x  is
an internal node.
2 . Each internal node x  also contains x . n  + 1 pointers x . c1 , x . c2 , … ,
x . cx . n +1  to its children. Leaf nodes have no children, and so their ci
attributes are undefined.
3 . The keys x . keyi  separate the ranges of keys stored in each subtree: if
ki  is any key stored in the subtree with root x . ci , then
k1  ≤ x . key1  ≤ k2  ≤ x . key2  ≤ ⋯  ≤ x . keyx . n  ≤ kx . n +1 .
4 . All leaves have the same depth, which is the tree’ s height h .
5 . Nodes have lower and upper bounds on the number of keys they can
contain, expressed in terms of a fixed integer t  ≥ 2 called the
minimum degree  of the B-tree:
Page number: 603
a. Every node other than the root must have at least t  − 1 keys.
Every internal node other than the root thus has at least t  children.
If the tree is nonempty , the root must have at least one key .
b. Every node may contain at most 2 t  − 1 keys. Therefore, an
internal node may have at most 2 t  children. W e say that a node is
full  if it contains exactly 2 t  − 1 keys.3
The simplest B-tree occurs when t  = 2. Every internal node then has
either 2, 3, or 4 children, and it is a 2-3-4 tree . In practice, however , much
lar ger values of t  yield B-trees with smaller height.
The height of a B-tr ee
The number of disk accesses required for most operations on a B-tree is
proportional to the height of the B-tree. The following theorem bounds the
worst-case height of a B-tree.
Figur e 18.4  A B-tree of height 3 containing a minimum possible number of keys. Shown inside each
node x  is x . n .
Theorem 18.1
If n  ≥ 1, then for any n -key B-tree T  of height h  and minimum degree t  ≥ 2,
Proof    By definition, the root of a nonempty B-tree T  contains at least one
key , and all other nodes contain at least t  − 1 keys. Let h  be the height of T .
Page number: 604
Then T  contains at least 2 nodes at depth 1, at least 2 t  nodes at depth 2, at
least 2 t2  nodes at depth 3, and so on, until at depth h , it has at least 2 th −1
nodes. Figure 18.4  illustrates such a tree for h  = 3. The number n  of keys
therefore satisfies the inequality
so that th ≤ ( n  + 1)/2. T aking base- t  logarithms of both sides proves the
theorem.
▪
Y ou can see the power of B-trees as compared with red-black trees.
Although the height of the tree grows as O (log n ) in both cases (recall that t
is a constant), for B-trees the base of the logarithm can be many times
lar ger . Thus, B-trees save a factor of about lg t  over red-black trees in the
number of nodes examined for most tree operations. Because examining an
arbitrary node in a tree usually entails accessing the disk, B-trees avoid a
substantial number of disk accesses.
Exer cises
18.1-1
Why isn’ t a minimum degree of t  = 1 allowed?
18.1-2
For what values of t  is the tree of Figure 18.1  a legal B-tree?
18.1-3
Show all legal B-trees of minimum degree 2 that store the keys 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
18.1-4
As a function of the minimum degree t , what is the maximum number of
keys that can be stored in a B-tree of height h ?
18.1-5
Page number: 605
Describe the data structure that results if each black node in a red-black tree
absorbs its red children, incorporating their children with its own.
18.2    Basic operations on B-tr ees
This section presents the details of the operations B-T REE -S EARCH , B-T REE -
C REA TE , and B-T REE -I NSER T . These procedures observe two conventions:
The root of the B-tree is always in main memory , so that no
procedure ever needs to perform a D ISK -R EAD  on the root. If any
changes to the root node occur , however , then D ISK -W RITE  must be
called on the root.
Any nodes that are passed as parameters must already have had a
D ISK -R EAD  operation performed on them.
The procedures are all “one-pass” algorithms that proceed downward from
the root of the tree, without having to back up.
Sear ching a B-tr ee
Searching a B-tree is much like searching a binary search tree, except that
instead of making a binary , or “two-way ,” branching decision at each node,
the search makes a multiway branching decision according to the number of
the node’ s children. More precisely , at each internal node x , the search
makes an ( x . n  + 1)-way branching decision.
The procedure B-T REE -S EARCH  generalizes the T REE -S EARCH  procedure
defined for binary search trees on page 316. It takes as input a pointer to the
root node x  of a subtree and a key k  to be searched for in that subtree. The
top-level call is thus of the form B-T REE -S EARCH ( T . r oot , k ). If k  is in the B-
tree, then B-T REE -S EARCH  returns the ordered pair ( y , i ) consisting of a node
y  and an index i  such that y . keyi  = k . Otherwise, the procedure returns NIL .
B-T REE -S EARCH ( x , k )
1 i  = 1
2 while  i  ≤ x . n  and k > x . key i
3 i  = i  + 1
4 if  i  ≤ x . n  and k  == x . key i
5 r eturn  ( x , i )
Page number: 606
6 elseif  x . leaf
7 r eturn NIL
8 else  D ISK -R EAD ( x . c i )
9 r eturn  B-T REE -S EARCH ( x . c i , k )
Using a linear -search procedure, lines 1–3 of B-T REE -S EARCH  find the
smallest index i  such that k  ≤ x . keyi , or else they set i  to x . n  + 1. Lines 4–5
check to see whether the search has discovered the key , returning if it has.
Otherwise, if x  is a leaf, then line 7 terminates the search unsuccessfully ,
and if x  is an internal node, lines 8–9 recurse to search the appropriate
subtree of x , after performing the necessary D ISK -R EAD  on that child. Figure
18.1  illustrates the operation of B-T REE -S EARCH . The blue nodes are those
examined during a search for the key R .
As in the T REE -S EARCH  procedure for binary search trees, the nodes
encountered during the recursion form a simple path downward from the
root of the tree. The B-T REE -S EARCH  procedure therefore accesses O ( h ) =
O (logt  n ) disk blocks, where h  is the height of the B-tree and n  is the
number of keys in the B-tree. Since x . n  < 2 t , the while  loop of lines 2–3
takes O ( t ) time within each node, and the total CPU time is O ( th ) = O ( t
logt n ).
Cr eating an empty B-tr ee
T o build a B-tree T , first use the B-T REE -C REA TE  procedure on the next page
to create an empty root node and then call the B-T REE -I NSER T  procedure on
page 508 to add new keys. Both of these procedures use an auxiliary
procedure A LLOCA TE -N ODE , whose pseudocode we omit and which
allocates one disk block to be used as a new node in O (1) time. A node
created by A LLOCA TE -N ODE  requires no D ISK -R EAD , since there is as yet no
useful information stored on the disk for that node. B-T REE -C REA TE  requires
O (1) disk operations and O (1) CPU time.
B-T REE -C REA TE ( T )
1 x  = A LLOCA TE -N ODE ()
2 x . leaf  = T R U E
3 x . n  = 0
4 D ISK -W RITE ( x )
5 T . r oot  = x
Page number: 607
Inserting a key into a B-tr ee
Inserting a key into a B-tree is significantly more complicated than inserting
a key into a binary search tree. As with binary search trees, you search for
the leaf position at which to insert the new key . W ith a B-tree, however , you
cannot simply create a new leaf node and insert it, as the resulting tree
would fail to be a valid B-tree. Instead, you insert the new key into an
existing leaf node. Since you cannot insert a key into a leaf node that is full,
you need an operation that splits  a full node y  (having 2 t  − 1 keys) around
its median key  y . keyt  into two nodes having only t  − 1 keys each. The
median key moves up into y ’ s parent to identify the dividing point between
the two new trees. But if y ’ s parent is also full, you must split it before you
can insert the new key , and thus you could end up splitting full nodes all the
way up the tree.
T o avoid having to go back up the tree, just split every full node you
encounter as you go down the tree. In this way , whenever you need to split
a full node, you are assured that its parent is not full. Inserting a key into a
B-tree then requires only a single pass down the tree from the root to a leaf.
Splitting a node in a B-tree
The procedure B-T REE -S PLIT -C HILD  on the facing page takes as input a
nonfull  internal node x  (assumed to reside in main memory) and an index i
such that x . ci  (also assumed to reside in main memory) is a full  child of x .
The procedure splits this child in two and adjusts x  so that it has an
additional child. T o split a full root, you first need to make the root a child
of a new empty root node, so that you can use B-T REE -S PLIT -C HILD . The
tree thus grows in height by 1: splitting is the only means by which the tree
grows taller .
B-T REE -S PLIT -C HILD ( x , i )
  1 y  = x . c i //  full node to split
  2 z  = A LLOCA TE -N ODE () //  z  will take half of y
  3 z . leaf  = y . leaf
  4 z . n  = t  − 1
  5 for  j  = 1 to  t  − 1 //  z  gets y ’ s greatest keys …
  6 z . key j  = y . key j + t
  7 if  not y . leaf
  8 for  j  = 1 to  t //  … and its corresponding children
Page number: 608
  9 z . c j  = y . c j + t
10 y . n  = t  − 1 //  y  keeps t  − 1 keys
1 1 for  j  = x . n  + 1 downto  i  + 1 //  shift x ’ s children to the right …
12 x . c j +1  = x . c j
13 x . c i +1  = z //  … to make room for z  as a child
14 for  j  = x . n downto  i //  shift the corresponding keys in x
15 x . key j +1  = x . key j
16 x . key i  = y . key t //  insert y ’ s median key
17 x . n  = x . n  + 1 //  x  has gained a child
18 D ISK -W RITE ( y )
19 D ISK -W RITE ( z )
20 D ISK -W RITE ( x )
Figure 18.5  illustrates how a node splits. B-T REE -S PLIT -C HILD  splits the
full node y  = x . ci  about its median key ( S  in the figure), which moves up
into y ’ s parent node x . Those keys in y  that are greater than the median key
move into a new node z , which becomes a new child of x .
B-T REE -S PLIT -C HILD  works by straightforward cutting and pasting. Node
x  is the parent of the node y  being split, which is x ’ s i th child (set in line 1).
Node y  originally has 2 t  children and 2 t  − 1 keys, but splitting reduces y  to t
children and t  − 1 keys. The t  lar gest children and t  − 1 keys of node y  move
over to node z , which becomes a new child of x , positioned just after y  in x ’ s
table of children. The median key of y  moves up to become the key in node
x  that separates the pointers to nodes y  and z .
Lines 2–9 create node z  and give it the lar gest t  − 1 keys and, if y  and z
are internal nodes, the corresponding t  children of y . Line 10 adjusts the key
count for y . Then, lines 1 1–17 shift keys and child pointers in x  to the right
in order to make room for x ’ s new child, insert z  as a new child of x , move
the median key from y  up to x  in order to separate y  from z , and adjust x ’ s
key count. Lines 18–20 write out all modified disk blocks. The CPU time
used by B-T REE -S PLIT -C HILD  is Θ( t ), due to the for  loops in lines 5–6 and
8–9. (The for  loops in lines 1 1–12 and 14–15 also run for O ( t ) iterations.)
The procedure performs O (1) disk operations.
Page number: 609
Figur e 18.5  Splitting a node with t  = 4. Node y  = x . c i  splits into two nodes, y  and z , and the median
key S  of y  moves up into y ’ s parent.
Inserting a key into a B-tree in a single pass down the tree
Inserting a key k  into a B-tree T  of height h  requires just a single pass down
the tree and O ( h ) disk accesses. The CPU time required is O ( th ) = O ( t  logt
n ). The B-T REE -I NSER T  procedure uses B-T REE -S PLIT -C HILD  to guarantee
that the recursion never descends to a full node. If the root is full, B-T REE -
I NSER T  splits it by calling the procedure B-T REE -S PLIT -R OOT  on the facing
page.
B-T REE -I NSER T ( T , k )
1 r  = T . r oot
2 if  r . n  == 2 t  − 1
3 s  = B-T REE -S PLIT -R OOT ( T )
4 B-T REE -I NSER T -N ONFULL ( s , k )
5 else  B-T REE -I NSER T -N ONFULL ( r , k )
B-T REE -I NSER T  works as follows. If the root is full, then line 3 calls B-
T REE -S PLIT -R OOT  in line 3 to split it. A new node s  (with two children)
becomes the root and is returned by B-T REE -S PLIT -R OOT . Splitting the root,
illustrated in Figure 18.6 , is the only way to increase the height of a B-tree.
Unlike a binary search tree, a B-tree increases in height at the top instead of
at the bottom. Regardless of whether the root split, B-T REE -I NSER T  finishes
by calling B-T REE -I NSER T -N ONFULL  to insert key k  into the tree rooted at the
nonfull root node, which is either the new root (the call in line 4) or the
original root (the call in line 5).
Page number: 610
Figur e 18.6  Splitting the root with t  = 4. Root node r  splits in two, and a new root node s  is created.
The new root contains the median key of r  and has the two halves of r  as children. The B-tree grows
in height by one when the root is split. A B-tree’ s height increases only when the root splits.
B-T REE -S PLIT -R OOT ( T )
1 s  = A LLOCA TE -N ODE ()
2 s . leaf  = F ALSE
3 s . n  = 0
4 s . c 1  = T . r oot
5 T . r oot  = s
6 B-T REE -S PLIT -C HILD ( s , 1)
7 r eturn  s
The auxiliary procedure B-T REE -I NSER T -N ONFULL  on page 51 1 inserts
key k  into node x , which is assumed to be nonfull when the procedure is
called. B-T REE I NSER T -N ONFULL  recurses as necessary down the tree, at all
times guaranteeing that the node to which it recurses is not full by calling
B-T REE -S PLIT -C HILD  as necessary . The operation of B-T REE -I NSER T  and the
recursive operation of B-T REE -I NSER T -N ONFULL  guarantee that this
assumption is true.
Figure 18.7  illustrates the various cases of how B-T REE -I NSER T -N ONFULL
inserts a key into a B-tree. Lines 3–8 handle the case in which x  is a leaf
node by inserting key k  into x , shifting to the right all keys in x  that are
greater than k . If x  is not a leaf node, then k  should go into the appropriate
leaf node in the subtree rooted at internal node x . Lines 9–1 1 determine the
child x . ci  to which the recursion descends. Line 13 detects whether the
recursion would descend to a full child, in which case line 14 calls B-T REE -
S PLIT -C HILD  to split that child into two nonfull children, and lines 15–16
Page number: 611
determine which of the two children is the correct one to descend to. (Note
that D ISK -R EAD ( x . ci ) is not needed after line 16 increments i , since the
recursion descends in this case to a child that was just created by B-T REE -
S PLIT -C HILD .) The net ef fect of lines 13–16 is thus to guarantee that the
procedure never recurses to a full node. Line 17 then recurses to insert k
into the appropriate subtree.
Page number: 612
Figur e 18.7  Inserting keys into a B-tree. The minimum degree t  for this B-tree is 3, so that a node
can hold at most 5 keys. Blue nodes are modified by the insertion process. (a)  The initial tree for this
example. (b)  The result of inserting B  into the initial tree. This case is a simple insertion into a leaf
node. (c)  The result of inserting Q  into the previous tree. The node RST U V  splits into two nodes
containing RS  and U V , the key T  moves up to the root, and Q  is inserted in the leftmost of the two
halves (the RS  node). (d)  The result of inserting L  into the previous tree. The root splits right away ,
since it is full, and the B-tree grows in height by one. Then L  is inserted into the leaf containing JK .
(e)  The result of inserting F  into the previous tree. The node ABCDE  splits before F  is inserted into
the rightmost of the two halves (the DE  node).
B-T REE -I NSER T -N ONFULL ( x , k )
Page number: 613
  1 i  = x . n
  2 if  x . leaf //  inserting into a leaf?
  3 while  i  ≥ 1 and k  < x . key i //  shift keys in x  to make room for k
  4 x . key i +1  = x . key i
  5 i  = i  − 1
  6 x . key i +1  = k //  insert key k  in x
  7 x . n  = x . n  + 1 //  now x  has 1 more key
  8 D ISK -W RITE ( x )
  9 else while  i  ≥ 1 and k  < x . key i //  find the child where k  belongs
10 i  = i  − 1
1 1 i  = i  + 1
12 D ISK -R EAD ( x . c i )
13 if  x . c i . n  == 2 t  − 1 //  split the child if it’ s full
14 B-T REE -S PLIT -C HILD ( x , i )
15 if  k > x . key i //  does k  go into x . c i  or x . c i +1 ?
16 i  = i  + 1
17 B-T REE -I NSER T -N ONFULL ( x . c i , k )
For a B-tree of height h , B-T REE -I NSER T  performs O ( h ) disk accesses,
since only O (1) D ISK -R EAD  and D ISK -W RITE  operations occur at each level
of the tree. The total CPU time used is O ( t ) in each level of the tree, or
O ( th ) = O ( t  logt  n ) overall. Since B-T REE -I NSER T -N ONFULL  is tail-recursive,
you can instead implement it with a while  loop, thereby demonstrating that
the number of blocks that need to be in main memory at any time is O (1).
Exer cises
18.2-1
Show the results of inserting the keys
F , S , Q , K , C , L , H , T , V , W , M , R , N , P , A , B , X , Y , D , Z , E
in order into an empty B-tree with minimum degree 2. Draw only the
configurations of the tree just before some node must split, and also draw
the final configuration.
18.2-2
Explain under what circumstances, if any , redundant D ISK -R EAD  or D ISK -
W RITE  operations occur during the course of executing a call to B-T REE -
I NSER T . (A redundant D ISK -R EAD  is a D ISK -R EAD  for a block that is already
in memory . A redundant D ISK -W RITE  writes to disk a block of information
that is identical to what is already stored there.)
Page number: 614
18.2-3
Professor Bunyan asserts that the B-T REE -I NSER T  procedure always results
in a B-tree with the minimum possible height. Show that the professor is
mistaken by proving that with t  = 2 and the set of keys {1, 2, … , 15}, there
is no insertion sequence that results in a B-tree with the minimum possible
height.
★  18.2-4
If you insert the keys {1, 2, … , n } into an empty B-tree with minimum
degree 2, how many nodes does the final B-tree have?
18.2-5
Since leaf nodes require no pointers to children, they could conceivably use
a dif ferent (lar ger) t  value than internal nodes for the same disk block size.
Show how to modify the procedures for creating and inserting into a B-tree
to handle this variation.
18.2-6
Suppose that you implement B-T REE -S EARCH  to use binary search rather
than linear search within each node. Show that this change makes the
required CPU time O (lg n ), independent of how t  might be chosen as a
function of n .
18.2-7
Suppose that disk hardware allows you to choose the size of a disk block
arbitrarily , but that the time it takes to read the disk block is a + bt , where a
and b  are specified constants and t  is the minimum degree for a B-tree using
blocks of the selected size. Describe how to choose t  so as to minimize
(approximately) the B-tree search time. Suggest an optimal value of t  for
the case in which a  = 5 milliseconds and b  = 10 microseconds.
18.3    Deleting a key fr om a B-tr ee
Deletion from a B-tree is analogous to insertion but a little more
complicated, because you can delete a key from any node—not just a leaf—
and when you delete a key from an internal node, you must rearrange the
node’ s children. As in insertion, you must guard against deletion producing
a tree whose structure violates the B-tree properties. Just as a node should
Page number: 615
not get too big due to insertion, a node must not get too small during
deletion (except that the root is allowed to have fewer than the minimum
number t  − 1 of keys). And just as a simple insertion algorithm might have
to back up if a node on the path to where the key is to be inserted is full, a
simple approach to deletion might have to back up if a node (other than the
root) along the path to where the key is to be deleted has the minimum
number of keys.
The procedure B-T REE -D ELETE  deletes the key k  from the subtree rooted
at x . Unlike the procedures T REE -D ELETE  on page 325 and RB-D ELETE  on
page 348, which are given the node to delete—presumably as the result of a
prior search—B-T REE -D ELETE  combines the search for key k  with the
deletion process. Why do we combine search and deletion in B-T REE -
D ELETE ? Just as B-T REE -I NSER T  prevents any node from becoming overfull
(having more than 2 t  − 1 keys) while making a single pass down the tree,
B-T REE -D ELETE  prevents any node from becoming underfull (having fewer
than t  − 1 keys) while also making a single pass down the tree, searching
for and ultimately deleting the key .
T o prevent any node from becoming underfull, the design of B-T REE -
D ELETE  guarantees that whenever it calls itself recursively on a node x , the
number of keys in x  is at least the minimum degree t  at the time of the call.
(Although the root may have fewer than t  keys and a recursive call may be
made fr om  the root, no recursive call is made on  the root.) This condition
requires one more key than the minimum required by the usual B-tree
conditions, and so a key might have to be moved from x  into one of its child
nodes (still leaving x  with at least the minimum t  − 1 keys) before a
recursive call is made on that child, thus allowing deletion to occur in one
downward pass without having to traverse back up the tree.
W e describe how the procedure B-T REE -D ELETE ( T , k ) deletes a key k
from a B-tree T  instead of presenting detailed pseudocode. W e examine
three cases, illustrated in Figure 18.8 . The cases are for when the search
arrives at a leaf, at an internal node containing key k , and at an internal node
not containing key k . As mentioned above, in all three cases node x  has at
least t  keys (with the possible exception of when x  is the root). Cases 2 and
3—when x  is an internal node—guarantee this property as the recursion
descends through the B-tree.

Page number: 616
Figur e 18.8  Deleting keys from a B-tree. The minimum degree for this B-tree is t  = 3, so that, other
than the root, every node must have at least 2 keys. Blue nodes are those that are modified by the
deletion process. (a)  The B-tree of Figure 18.7(e) . (b)  Deletion of F , which is case 1: simple deletion
Page number: 617
p ( ) g ( ) ( ) , p
from a leaf when all nodes visited during the search (other than the root) have at least t  = 3 keys. (c)
Deletion of M , which is case 2a: the predecessor L  of M  moves up to take M ’ s position. (d)  Deletion
of G , which is case 2c: push G  down to make node DEGJK  and then delete G  from this leaf (case 1).
(e)  Deletion of D , which is case 3b: since the recursion cannot descend to node CL  because it has
only 2 keys, push P  down and mer ge it with CL  and TX  to form CLP TX . Then delete D  from a leaf
(case 1). (e0)  After (e), delete the empty root. The tree shrinks in height by 1. (f)  Deletion of B ,
which is case 3a: C  moves to fill B ’ s position and E  moves to fill C ’ s position.
Case 1:  The sear ch arrives at a leaf node x.  If x  contains key k , then delete
k  from x . If x  does not contain key k , then k  was not in the B-tree and
nothing else needs to be done.
Case 2:  The sear ch arrives at an internal node x that contains key k.  Let k  =
x . keyi . One of the following three cases applies, depending on the number
of keys in x . ci  (the child of x  that precedes k ) and x . ci +1  (the child of x  that
follows k ).
Case 2a:  x . ci  has at least t keys.  Find the predecessor k ′ of k  in the subtree
rooted at x . ci . Recursively delete k ′ from x . ci , and replace k  by k ′ in x .
(Key k ′ can be found and deleted in a single downward pass.)
Case 2b:  x . ci  has t  − 1 keys and x . ci +1 has at least t keys.  This case is
symmetric to case 2a. Find the successor k ′ of k  in the subtree rooted at
x . ci +1 . Recursively delete k ′ from x . ci +1 , and replace k  by k ′ in x . (Again,
finding and deleting k ′ can be done in a single downward pass.)
Case 2c :  Both x . ci  and x . ci +1 have t − 1 keys.  Mer ge k  and all of x . ci +1  into
x . ci , so that x  loses both k  and the pointer to x . ci +1 , and x . ci  now contains
2 t  − 1 keys. Then free x . ci +1  and recursively delete k  from x . ci .
Case 3 :  The sear ch arrives at an internal node x that does not contain key
k.  Continue searching down the tree while ensuring that each node visited
has at least t  keys. T o do so, determine the root x . ci  of the appropriate
subtree that must contain k , if k  is in the tree at all. If x . ci  has only t  − 1
keys, execute case 3a or 3b as necessary to guarantee descending to a
node containing at least t  keys. Then finish by recursing on the
appropriate child of x .
Case 3a :  x . ci  has only t  − 1 keys but has an immediate sibling with at least
t keys.  Give x . ci  an extra key by moving a key from x  down into x . ci ,
Page number: 618
moving a key from x . ci ’ s immediate left or right sibling up into x , and
moving the appropriate child pointer from the sibling into x . ci .
Case 3b :  x . ci  and each of x . ci ’ s immediate siblings have t  − 1 keys.  (It is
possible for x . ci  to have either one or two siblings.) Mer ge x . ci  with one
sibling, which involves moving a key from x  down into the new mer ged
node to become the median key for that node.
In cases 2c and 3b, if node x  is the root, it could end up having no keys.
When this situation occurs, then x  is deleted, and x ’ s only child x . c1
becomes the new root of the tree. This action decreases the height of the
tree by one and preserves the property that the root of the tree contains at
least one key (unless the tree is empty).
Since most of the keys in a B-tree are in the leaves, deletion operations
often end up deleting keys from leaves. The B-T REE -D ELETE  procedure then
acts in one downward pass through the tree, without having to back up.
When deleting a key in an internal node x , however , the procedure might
make a downward pass through the tree to find the key’ s predecessor or
successor and then return to node x  to replace the key with its predecessor
or successor (cases 2a and 2b). Returning to node x  does not require a
traversal through all the levels between x  and the node containing the
predecessor or successor , however , since the procedure can just keep a
pointer to x  and the key position within x  and put the predecessor or
successor key directly there.
Although this procedure seems complicated, it involves only O ( h ) disk
operations for a B-tree of height h , since only O (1) calls to D ISK -R EAD  and
D ISK -W RITE  are made between recursive invocations of the procedure. The
CPU time required is O ( th ) = O ( t  logt n ).
Exer cises
18.3-1
Show the results of deleting C , P , and V , in order , from the tree of Figure
18.8(f) .
18.3-2
W rite pseudocode for B-T REE -D ELETE .
Page number: 619
Pr oblems
18-1     Stacks on secondary storage
Consider implementing a stack in a computer that has a relatively small
amount of fast primary memory and a relatively lar ge amount of slower
disk storage. The operations P USH  and P OP  work on single-word values. The
stack can grow to be much lar ger than can fit in memory , and thus most of it
must be stored on disk.
A simple, but inef ficient, stack implementation keeps the entire stack on
disk. Maintain in memory a stack pointer , which is the disk address of the
top element on the stack. Indexing block numbers and word of fsets within
blocks from 0, if the pointer has value p , the top element is the ( p  mod m )th
word on block ⌊ p / m ⌋  of the disk, where m  is the number of words per block.
T o implement the P USH  operation, increment the stack pointer , read the
appropriate block into memory from disk, copy the element to be pushed to
the appropriate word on the block, and write the block back to disk. A P OP
operation is similar . Read in the appropriate block from disk, save the top of
the stack, decrement the stack pointer , and return the saved value. Y ou need
not write back the block, since it was not modified, and the word in the
block that contained the popped value is ignored.
As in the analyses of B-tree operations, two costs matter: the total
number of disk accesses and the total CPU time. A disk access also incurs a
cost in CPU time. In particular , any disk access to a block of m  words
incurs char ges of one disk access and Θ( m ) CPU time.
a.  Asymptotically , what is the worst-case number of disk accesses for n
stack operations using this simple implementation? What is the CPU time
for n  stack operations? Express your answer in terms of m  and n  for this
and subsequent parts.
Now consider a stack implementation in which you keep one block of the
stack in memory . (Y ou also maintain a small amount of memory to record
which block is currently in memory .) Y ou can perform a stack operation
only if the relevant disk block resides in memory . If necessary , you can
write the block currently in memory to the disk and read the new block
from the disk into memory . If the relevant disk block is already in memory ,
then no disk accesses are required.
Page number: 620
b.  What is the worst-case number of disk accesses required for n  P USH
operations? What is the CPU time?
c.  What is the worst-case number of disk accesses required for n  stack
operations? What is the CPU time?
Suppose that you now implement the stack by keeping two blocks in
memory (in addition to a small number of words for bookkeeping).
d.  Describe how to manage the stack blocks so that the amortized number
of disk accesses for any stack operation is O (1/ m ) and the amortized CPU
time for any stack operation is O (1).
18-2     Joining and splitting 2-3-4 trees
The join  operation takes two dynamic sets S ′ and S ″ and an element x  such
that x ′. key < x . key < x ″. key  for any x ′ ∈  S ′ and x ″ ∈  S ″. It returns a set S  =
S ′ ∪  { x } ∪  S ″. The split  operation is like an “inverse” join: given a dynamic
set S  and an element x  ∈  S , it creates a set S ′ that consists of all elements in
S  − { x } whose keys are less than x . key  and another set S ″ that consists of all
elements in S  − { x } whose keys are greater than x . key . This problem
investigates how to implement these operations on 2-3-4 trees (B-trees with
t  = 2). Assume for convenience that elements consist only of keys and that
all key values are distinct.
a.  Show how to maintain, for every node x  of a 2-3-4 tree, the height of the
subtree rooted at x  as an attribute x . height . Make sure that your
implementation does not af fect the asymptotic running times of searching,
insertion, and deletion.
b.  Show how to implement the join operation. Given two 2-3-4 trees T ′ and
T ″ and a key k , the join operation should run in O (1 + | h ′ − h ″|) time,
where h ′ and h ″ are the heights of T ′ and T ″, respectively .
c.  Consider the simple path p  from the root of a 2-3-4 tree T  to a given key
k , the set S ′ of keys in T  that are less than k , and the set S ″ of keys in T
that are greater than k . Show that p  breaks S ′ into a set of trees 
 and a set of keys 
  such that 
  for i  =
1, 2, … , m  and any keys 
  and 
 . What is the relationship
between the heights of 
  and 
 ? Describe how p  breaks S ″ into sets of
trees and keys.
Page number: 621
d.  Show how to implement the split operation on T . Use the join operation
to assemble the keys in S ′ into a single 2-3-4 tree T ′ and the keys in S ″
into a single 2-3-4 tree T ″. The running time of the split operation should
be O (lg n ), where n  is the number of keys in T . ( Hint : The costs for
joining should telescope.)
Chapter notes
Knuth [ 261 ], Aho, Hopcroft, and Ullman [ 5 ], and Sedgewick and W ayne
[ 402 ] give further discussions of balanced-tree schemes and B-trees. Comer
[ 99 ] provides a comprehensive survey of B-trees. Guibas and Sedgewick
[ 202 ] discuss the relationships among various kinds of balanced-tree
schemes, including red-black trees and 2-3-4 trees.
In 1970, J. E. Hopcroft invented 2-3 trees, a precursor to B-trees and 2-
3-4 trees, in which every internal node has either two or three children.
Bayer and McCreight [ 39 ] introduced B-trees in 1972 with no explanation
of their choice of name.
Bender , Demaine, and Farach-Colton [ 47 ] studied how to make B-trees
perform well in the presence of memory-hierarchy ef fects. Their cache-
oblivious  algorithms work ef ficiently without explicitly knowing the data
transfer sizes within the memory hierarchy .
1 When specifying disk capacities, one terabyte is one trillion bytes, rather than 2 40  bytes.
2 SSDs also exhibit greater latency than main memory and access data in blocks.
3 Another common variant on a B-tree, known as a B*- tree , requires each internal node to be at least
2/3 full, rather than at least half full, as a B-tree requires.
Page number: 622
19        Data Structur es for Disjoint Sets
Some applications involve grouping n  distinct elements into a collection of
disjoint sets—sets with no elements in common. These applications often
need to perform two operations in particular: finding the unique set that
contains a given element and uniting two sets. This chapter explores
methods for maintaining a data structure that supports these operations.
Section 19.1  describes the operations supported by a disjoint-set data
structure and presents a simple application. Section 19.2  looks at a simple
linked-list implementation for disjoint sets. Section 19.3  presents a more
ef ficient representation using rooted trees. The running time using the tree
representation is theoretically superlinear , but for all practical purposes it is
linear . Section 19.4  defines and discusses a very quickly growing function
and its very slowly growing inverse, which appears in the running time of
operations on the tree-based implementation, and then, by a complex
amortized analysis, proves an upper bound on the running time that is just
barely superlinear .
19.1    Disjoint-set operations
A disjoint-set data structure  maintains a collection S  = { S1 , S2 , … , Sk } of
disjoint dynamic sets. T o identify each set, choose a representative , which is
some member of the set. In some applications, it doesn’ t matter which
member is used as the representative; it matters only that if you ask for the
representative of a dynamic set twice without modifying the set between the
requests, you get the same answer both times. Other applications may
require a prespecified rule for choosing the representative, such as choosing
the smallest member in the set (for a set whose elements can be ordered).
Page number: 623
As in the other dynamic-set implementations we have studied, each
element of a set is represented by an object. Letting x  denote an object, we’ll
see how to support the following operations:
M AKE -S ET ( x ), where x  does not already belong to some other set, creates a
new set whose only member (and thus representative) is x .
U NION ( x , y ) unites two disjoint, dynamic sets that contain x  and y , say Sx  and
Sy , into a new set that is the union of these two sets. The representative of
the resulting set is any member of Sx  ∪  Sy , although many
implementations of U NION  specifically choose the representative of either
Sx  or Sy  as the new representative. Since the sets in the collection must at
all times be disjoint, the U NION  operation destroys sets Sx  and Sy , removing
them from the collection S . In practice, implementations often absorb the
elements of one of the sets into the other set.
F IND -S ET ( x ) returns a pointer to the representative of the unique set
containing x .
Throughout this chapter , we’ll analyze the running times of disjoint-set
data structures in terms of two parameters: n , the number of M AKE -S ET
operations, and m , the total number of M AKE -S ET , U NION , and F IND -S ET
operations. Because the total number of operations m  includes the n  M AKE -
S ET  operations, m  ≥ n . The first n  operations are always M AKE -S ET
operations, so that after the first n  operations, the collection consists of n
singleton sets. Since the sets are disjoint at all times, each U NION  operation
reduces the number of sets by 1. After n  − 1 U NION  operations, therefore,
only one set remains, and so at most n  − 1 U NION  operations can occur .
An application of disjoint-set data structur es
One of the many applications of disjoint-set data structures arises in
determining the connected components of an undirected graph (see Section
B.4 ). Figure 19.1(a) , for example, shows a graph with four connected
components.
The procedure C ONNECTED -C OMPONENTS  on the following page uses the
disjoint-set operations to compute the connected components of a graph.
Once the C ONNECTED -C OMPONENTS  procedure has preprocessed the graph,
the procedure S AME -C OMPONENT  answers queries about whether two vertices
Page number: 624
belong to the same connected component. In pseudocode, we denote the set
of vertices of a graph G  by G . V  and the set of edges by G . E .
The procedure C ONNECTED -C OMPONENTS  initially places each vertex v  in
its own set. Then, for each edge ( u , v ), it unites the sets containing u  and v .
By Exercise 19.1-2, after all the edges are processed, two vertices belong to
the same connected component if and only if the objects corresponding to
the vertices belong to the same set. Thus C ONNECTED -C OMPONENTS  computes
sets in such a way that the procedure S AME -C OMPONENT  can determine
whether two vertices are in the same connected component. Figure 19.1(b)
illustrates how C ONNECTED -C OMPONENTS  computes the disjoint sets.
Figur e 19.1 (a)  A graph with four connected components: { a , b , c , d }, { e , f , g }, { h , i }, and { j  }. (b)
The collection of disjoint sets after processing each edge.
C ONNECTED -C OMPONENTS ( G )
1 for  each vertex v  ∈  G . V
2 M AKE -S ET ( v )
3 for  each edge ( u , v ) ∈  G . E
4 if  F IND -S ET ( u ) ≠ F IND -S ET ( v )
5 U NION ( u , v )
S AME -C OMPONENT ( u , v )
1 if  F IND -S ET ( u ) == F IND -S ET ( v )
2 r eturn  T RUE
3 else r eturn F ALSE
Page number: 625
In an actual implementation of this connected-components algorithm, the
representations of the graph and the disjoint-set data structure would need to
reference each other . That is, an object representing a vertex would contain a
pointer to the corresponding disjoint-set object, and vice versa. Since these
programming details depend on the implementation language, we do not
address them further here.
When the edges of the graph are static—not changing over time—depth-
first search can compute the connected components faster (see Exercise
20.3-12 on page 572). Sometimes, however , the edges are added
dynamically , with the connected components updated as each edge is added.
In this case, the implementation given here can be more ef ficient than
running a new depth-first search for each new edge.
Exer cises
19.1-1
The C ONNECTED -C OMPONENTS  procedure is run on the undirected graph G  =
( V , E ), where V  = { a , b , c , d , e , f , g , h , i , j , k }, and the edges of E  are
processed in the order ( d , i ), ( f , k ), ( g , i ), ( b , g ), ( a , h ), ( i , j ), ( d , k ), ( b , j ), ( d ,
f ), ( g , j ), ( a , e ). List the vertices in each connected component after each
iteration of lines 3–5.
19.1-2
Show that after all edges are processed by C ONNECTED -C OMPONENTS , two
vertices belong to the same connected component if and only if they belong
to the same set.
19.1-3
During the execution of C ONNECTED -C OMPONENTS  on an undirected graph G
= ( V , E ) with k  connected components, how many times is F IND -S ET  called?
How many times is U NION  called? Express your answers in terms of | V  |, | E |,
and k .
19.2    Linked-list r epr esentation of disjoint sets
Figure 19.2(a)  shows a simple way to implement a disjoint-set data structure:
each set is represented by its own linked list. The object for each set has
attributes head , pointing to the first object in the list, and tail , pointing to the
Page number: 626
last object. Each object in the list contains a set member , a pointer to the next
object in the list, and a pointer back to the set object. W ithin each linked list,
the objects may appear in any order . The representative is the set member in
the first object in the list.
W ith this linked-list representation, both M AKE -S ET  and F IND -S ET  require
only O (1) time. T o carry out M AKE -S ET ( x ), create a new linked list whose
only object is x . For F IND -S ET ( x ), just follow the pointer from x  back to its
set object and then return the member in the object that head  points to. For
example, in Figure 19.2(a) , the call F IND -S ET ( g ) returns f .
Figur e 19.2 (a)  Linked-list representations of two sets. Set S 1  contains members d , f , and g , with
representative f , and set S 2  contains members b , c , e , and h , with representative c . Each object in the
list contains a set member , a pointer to the next object in the list, and a pointer back to the set object.
Each set object has pointers head  and tail  to the first and last objects, respectively . (b)  The result of
U NION ( g , e ), which appends the linked list containing e  to the linked list containing g . The
representative of the resulting set is f . The set object for e ’ s list, S 2 , is destroyed.
A simple implementation of union
The simplest implementation of the U NION  operation using the linked-list set
representation takes significantly more time than M AKE -S ET  or F IND -S ET . As
Figure 19.2(b)  shows, the operation U NION ( x , y ) appends y ’ s list onto the end
of x ’ s list. The representative of x ’ s list becomes the representative of the
resulting set. T o quickly find where to append y ’ s list, use the tail  pointer for
x ’ s list. Because all members of y ’ s list join x ’ s list, the U NION  operation
destroys the set object for y ’ s list. The U NION  operation is where this
Page number: 627
implementation pays the price for F IND -S ET  taking constant time: U NION
must also update the pointer to the set object for each object originally on y ’ s
list, which takes time linear in the length of y ’ s list. In Figure 19.2 , for
example, the operation U NION ( g , e ) causes pointers to be updated in the
objects for b , c , e , and h .
In fact, we can construct a sequence of m  operations on n  objects that
requires Θ( n2) time. Starting with objects x1 , x2 , … , xn , execute the
sequence of n  M AKE -S ET  operations followed by n  − 1 U NION  operations
shown in Figure 19.3 , so that m  = 2 n −1. The n  M AKE -S ET  operations take
Θ( n ) time. Because the i th U NION  operation updates i  objects, the total
number of objects updated by all n −1 U NION  operations forms an arithmetic
series:
Figur e 19.3  A sequence of 2 n  − 1 operations on n  objects that takes Θ( n2) time, or Θ( n ) time per
operation on average, using the linked-list set representation and the simple implementation of
U NION .
The total number of operations is 2 n −1, and so each operation on average
requires Θ( n ) time. That is, the amortized time of an operation is Θ( n ).
A weighted-union heuristic
In the worst case, the above implementation of U NION  requires an average of
Θ( n ) time per call, because it might be appending a longer list onto a shorter
list, and the procedure must update the pointer to the set object for each
member of the longer list. Suppose instead that each list also includes the
Page number: 628
length of the list (which can be maintained straightforwardly with constant
overhead) and that the U NION  procedure always appends the shorter list onto
the longer , breaking ties arbitrarily . W ith this simple weighted-union
heuristic , a single U NION  operation can still take Ω( n ) time if both sets have
Ω( n ) members. As the following theorem shows, however , a sequence of m
M AKE -S ET , U NION , and F IND -S ET  operations, n  of which are M AKE -S ET
operations, takes O ( m  + n  lg n ) time.
Theorem 19.1
Using the linked-list representation of disjoint sets and the weighted-union
heuristic, a sequence of m  M AKE -S ET , U NION , and F IND -S ET  operations, n  of
which are M AKE -S ET  operations, takes O ( m  + n  lg n ) time.
Proof    Because each U NION  operation unites two disjoint sets, at most n  − 1
U NION  operations occur over all. W e now bound the total time taken by these
U NION  operations. W e start by determining, for each object, an upper bound
on the number of times the object’ s pointer back to its set object is updated.
Consider a particular object x . Each time x ’ s pointer is updated, x  must have
started in the smaller set. The first time x ’ s pointer is updated, therefore, the
resulting set must have at least 2 members. Similarly , the next time x ’ s
pointer is updated, the resulting set must have had at least 4 members.
Continuing on, for any k  ≤ n , after x ’ s pointer has been updated ⌈ lg k ⌉  times,
the resulting set must have at least k  members. Since the lar gest set has at
most n  members, each object’ s pointer is updated at most ⌈ lg n ⌉  times over
all the U NION  operations. Thus the total time spent updating object pointers
over all U NION  operations is O ( n  lg n ). W e must also account for updating
the tail  pointers and the list lengths, which take only Θ(1) time per U NION
operation. The total time spent in all U NION  operations is thus O ( n  lg n ).
The time for the entire sequence of m  operations follows. Each M AKE -
S ET  and F IND -S ET  operation takes O (1) time, and there are O ( m ) of them.
The total time for the entire sequence is thus O ( m  + n  lg n ).
▪
Exer cises
19.2-1
W rite pseudocode for M AKE -S ET , F IND -S ET , and U NION  using the linked-list
representation and the weighted-union heuristic. Make sure to specify the
Page number: 629
attributes that you assume for set objects and list objects.
19.2-2
Show the data structure that results and the answers returned by the F IND -
S ET  operations in the following program. Use the linked-list representation
with the weighted-union heuristic. Assume that if the sets containing xi  and
xj  have the same size, then the operation U NION ( xi , xj ) appends xj ’ s list onto
xi ’ s list.
  1 for  i  = 1 to  16
  2 M AKE -S ET ( x i )
  3 for  i  = 1 to  15 by  2
  4 U NION ( x i , x i +1 )
  5 for  i  = 1 to  13 by  4
  6 U NION ( x i , x i +2 )
  7 U NION ( x 1 , x 5 )
  8 U NION ( x 1 1 , x 13 )
  9 U NION ( x 1 , x 10 )
10 F IND -S ET ( x 2 )
1 1 F IND -S ET ( x 9 )
19.2-3
Adapt the aggregate proof of Theorem 19.1 to obtain amortized time bounds
of O (1) for M AKE -S ET  and F IND -S ET  and O (lg n ) for U NION  using the linked-
list representation and the weighted-union heuristic.
19.2-4
Give a tight asymptotic bound on the running time of the sequence of
operations in Figure 19.3  assuming the linked-list representation and the
weighted-union heuristic.
19.2-5
Professor Gompers suspects that it might be possible to keep just one pointer
in each set object, rather than two ( head  and tail ), while keeping the number
of pointers in each list element at two. Show that the professor ’ s suspicion is
well founded by describing how to represent each set by a linked list such
that each operation has the same running time as the operations described in
this section. Describe also how the operations work. Y our scheme should
allow for the weighted-union heuristic, with the same ef fect as described in
this section. ( Hint : Use the tail of a linked list as its set’ s representative.)
Page number: 630
19.2-6
Suggest a simple change to the U NION  procedure for the linked-list
representation that removes the need to keep the tail  pointer to the last object
in each list. Regardless of whether the weighted-union heuristic is used, your
change should not change the asymptotic running time of the U NION
procedure. ( Hint : Rather than appending one list to another , splice them
together .)
19.3    Disjoint-set for ests
A faster implementation of disjoint sets represents sets by rooted trees, with
each node containing one member and each tree representing one set. In a
disjoint-set forest , illustrated in Figure 19.4(a) , each member points only to
its parent. The root of each tree contains the representative and is its own
parent. As we’ll see, although the straightforward algorithms that use this
representation are no faster than ones that use the linked-list representation,
two heuristics—“union by rank” and “path compression”—yield an
asymptotically optimal disjoint-set data structure.
The three disjoint-set operations have simple implementations. A M AKE -
S ET  operation simply creates a tree with just one node. A F IND -S ET  operation
follows parent pointers until it reaches the root of the tree. The nodes visited
on this simple path toward the root constitute the find path . A U NION
operation, shown in Figure 19.4(b) , simply causes the root of one tree to
point to the root of the other .
Figur e 19.4  A disjoint-set forest. (a)  T rees representing the two sets of Figure 19.2 . The tree on the
left represents the set { b , c , e , h }, with c  as the representative, and the tree on the right represents the
set { d , f , g }, with f  as the representative. (b)  The result of U NION  ( e , g ).
Page number: 631
Heuristics to impr ove the running time
So far , disjoint-set forests have not improved on the linked-list
implementation. A sequence of n  − 1 U NION  operations could create a tree
that is just a linear chain of n  nodes. By using two heuristics, however , we
can achieve a running time that is almost linear in the total number m  of
operations.
The first heuristic, union by rank , is similar to the weighted-union
heuristic we used with the linked-list representation. The common-sense
approach is to make the root of the tree with fewer nodes point to the root of
the tree with more nodes. Rather than explicitly keeping track of the size of
the subtree rooted at each node, however , we’ll adopt an approach that eases
the analysis. For each node, maintain a rank , which is an upper bound on the
height of the node. Union by rank makes the root with smaller rank point to
the root with lar ger rank during a U NION  operation.
The second heuristic, path compression , is also quite simple and highly
ef fective. As shown in Figure 19.5 , F IND -S ET  operations use it to make each
node on the find path point directly to the root. Path compression does not
change any ranks.
Pseudocode for disjoint-set for ests
The union-by-rank heuristic requires its implementation to keep track of
ranks. W ith each node x , maintain the integer value x . rank , which is an upper
bound on the height of x  (the number of edges in the longest simple path
from a descendant leaf to x ). When M AKE -S ET  creates a singleton set, the
single node in the corresponding tree has an initial rank of 0. Each F IND -S ET
operation leaves all ranks unchanged. The U NION  operation has two cases,
depending on whether the roots of the trees have equal rank. If the roots
have unequal ranks, make the root with higher rank the parent of the root
with lower rank, but don’ t change the ranks themselves. If the roots have
equal ranks, arbitrarily choose one of the roots as the parent and increment
its rank.
Page number: 632
Figur e 19.5  Path compression during the operation F IND -S ET . Arrows and self-loops at roots are
omitted. (a)  A tree representing a set prior to executing F IND -S ET ( a ). T riangles represent subtrees
whose roots are the nodes shown. Each node has a pointer to its parent. (b)  The same set after
executing F IND -S ET ( a ). Each node on the find path now points directly to the root.
Let’ s put this method into pseudocode, appearing on the next page. The
parent of node x  is denoted by x . p . The L INK  procedure, a subroutine called
by U NION , takes pointers to two roots as inputs. The F IND -S ET  procedure
with path compression, implemented recursively , turns out to be quite
simple.
The F IND -S ET  procedure is a two-pass method : as it recurses, it makes
one pass up the find path to find the root, and as the recursion unwinds, it
makes a second pass back down the find path to update each node to point
directly to the root. Each call of F IND -S ET ( x ) returns x . p  in line 3. If x  is the
root, then F IND -S ET  skips line 2 and just returns x . p , which is x . In this case
the recursion bottoms out. Otherwise, line 2 executes, and the recursive call
with parameter x . p  returns a pointer to the root. Line 2 updates node x  to
point directly to the root, and line 3 returns this pointer .
M AKE -S ET ( x )
1 x . p  = x
2 x . rank  = 0
Page number: 633
U NION ( x , y )
1 L INK (F IND -S ET ( x ), F IND -S ET ( y ))
L INK ( x , y )
1 if  x . rank > y . rank
2 y . p  = x
3 else  x . p  = y
4 if  x . rank  == y . rank
5 y . rank  = y . rank  + 1
F IND -S ET ( x )
1 if  x  ≠ x . p //  not the root?
2 x . p  = F IND -S ET ( x . p ) //  the root becomes the parent
3 r eturn  x . p //  return the root
Effect of the heuristics on the running time
Separately , either union by rank or path compression improves the running
time of the operations on disjoint-set forests, and combining the two
heuristics yields an even greater improvement. Alone, union by rank yields a
running time of O ( m  lg n ) for a sequence of m  operations, n  of which are
M AKE -S ET  (see Exercise 19.4-4), and this bound is tight (see Exercise 19.3-
3). Although we won’ t prove it here, for a sequence of n  M AKE -S ET
operations (and hence at most n  − 1 U NION  operations) and f  F IND -S ET
operations, the worst-case running time using only the path-compression
heuristic is Θ( n  + f  · (1 + log2+ f / n n )).
Combining union by rank and path compression gives a worst-case
running time of O ( m α ( n )), where α ( n ) is a very  slowly growing function,
defined in Section 19.4 . In any conceivable application of a disjoint-set data
structure, α ( n ) ≤ 4, and thus, its running time is as good as linear in m  for all
practical purposes. Mathematically speaking, however , it is superlinear .
Section 19.4  proves this O ( mα ( n )) upper bound.
Exer cises
19.3-1
Redo Exercise 19.2-2 using a disjoint-set forest with union by rank and path
compression. Show the resulting forest with each node including its xi  and
rank.
Page number: 634
19.3-2
W rite a nonrecursive version of F IND -S ET  with path compression.
19.3-3
Give a sequence of m  M AKE -S ET , U NION , and F IND -S ET  operations, n  of
which are M AKE -S ET  operations, that takes Ω( m  lg n ) time when using only
union by rank and not path compression.
19.3-4
Consider the operation P RINT -S ET ( x ), which is given a node x  and prints all
the members of x ’ s set, in any order . Show how to add just a single attribute
to each node in a disjoint-set forest so that P RINT -S ET ( x ) takes time linear in
the number of members of x ’ s set and the asymptotic running times of the
other operations are unchanged. Assume that you can print each member of
the set in O (1) time.
★  19.3-5
Show that any sequence of m  M AKE -S ET , F IND -S ET , and L INK  operations,
where all the L INK  operations appear before any of the F IND -S ET  operations,
takes only O ( m ) time when using both path compression and union by rank.
Y ou may assume that the ar guments to L INK  are roots within the disjoint-set
forest. What happens in the same situation when using only path
compression and not union by rank?
★  19.4 Analysis of union by rank with path compr ession
As noted in Section 19.3 , the combined union-by-rank and path-compression
heuristic runs in O ( m α ( n )) time for m  disjoint-set operations on n  elements.
In this section, we’ll explore the function α  to see just how slowly it grows.
Then we’ll analyze the running time using the potential method of amortized
analysis.
A very quickly gr owing function and its very slowly gr owing inverse
For integers j , k  ≥ 0, we define the function Ak ( j ) as

Page number: 635
where the expression 
  uses the functional-iteration notation defined
in equation (3.30) on page 68. Specifically , equation (3.30) gives 
 and 
  for i  ≥ 1. W e call the parameter k
the level  of the function A .
The function Ak ( j ) strictly increases with both j  and k . T o see just how
quickly this function grows, we first obtain closed-form expressions for A1 ( j )
and A2 ( j ).
Lemma 19.2
For any integer j  ≥ 1, we have A1 ( j ) = 2 j  + 1.
Proof    W e first use induction on i  to show that 
 . For the base
case, 
 . For the inductive step, assume that 
. Then 
 .
Finally , we note that 
 .
▪
Lemma 19.3
For any integer j  ≥ 1, we have A2  ( j ) = 2j +1( j  + 1) − 1.
Proof    W e first use induction on i  to show that 
 . For
the base case, we have 
 . For the inductive step,
assume that 
 . Then 
. Finally , we note that 
 .
Now we can see how quickly Ak ( j ) grows by simply examining Ak (1) for
levels k  = 0, 1, 2, 3, 4. From the definition of A0 ( j ) and the above lemmas,
we have A0 (1) = 1 + 1 = 2, A1 (1) = 2  ·  1 + 1 = 3, and A2 (1) = 21+1 · (1 + 1) −
1 = 7. W e also have
A 3 (1) =
= A 2 ( A 2 (1))
= A 2 (7)
=28 · 8 − 1
Page number: 636
=21 1 − 1
= 2047
and
A 4 (1) =
= A 3 ( A 3 (1))
= A 3 (2047)
=
≫ A 2 (2047)
=22048 · 2048 − 1
=22059 − 1
>22056
=(24)514
=16514
≫1080,
which is the estimated number of atoms in the observable universe. (The
symbol “ ≫ ” denotes the “much-greater -than” relation.)
W e define the inverse of the function Ak ( n ), for integer n  ≥ 0, by
In words, α ( n ) is the lowest level k  for which Ak (1) is at least n . From the
above values of Ak (1), we see that
It is only for values of n  so lar ge that the term “astronomical” understates
them (greater than A4 (1), a huge number) that α ( n ) > 4, and so α ( n ) ≤ 4 for
all practical purposes.
Pr operties of ranks
Page number: 637
In the remainder of this section, we prove an O ( mα ( n )) bound on the running
time of the disjoint-set operations with union by rank and path compression.
In order to prove this bound, we first prove some simple properties of ranks.
Lemma 19.4
For all nodes x , we have x . rank  ≤ x . p . rank , with strict inequality if x  ≠ x . p  ( x
is not a root). The value of x . rank  is initially 0, increases through time until x
≠ x . p , and from then on, x . rank  does not change. The value of x . p . rank
monotonically increases over time.
Proof    The proof is a straightforward induction on the number of operations,
using the implementations of M AKE -S ET , U NION , and F IND -S ET  that appear
on page 530, and is left as Exercise 19.4-1.
▪
Corollary 19.5
On the simple path from any node going up toward a root, node ranks
strictly increase.
▪
Lemma 19.6
Every node has rank at most n  − 1.
Proof    Each node’ s rank starts at 0, and it increases only upon L INK
operations. Because there are at most n  − 1 U NION  operations, there are also
at most n  − 1 L INK  operations. Because each L INK  operation either leaves all
ranks alone or increases some node’ s rank by 1, all ranks are at most n  − 1.
▪
Lemma 19.6 provides a weak bound on ranks. In fact, every node has
rank at most ⌊ lg n ⌋  (see Exercise 19.4-2). The looser bound of Lemma 19.6
suf fices for our purposes, however .
Pr oving the time bound
In order to prove the O ( mα ( n )) time bound, we’ll use the potential method of
amortized analysis from Section 16.3 . In performing the amortized analysis,
it will be convenient to assume that we invoke the L INK  operation rather than
the U NION  operation. That is, since the parameters of the L INK  procedure are
pointers to two roots, we act as though we perform the appropriate F IND -S ET
Page number: 638
operations separately . The following lemma shows that even if we count the
extra F IND -S ET  operations induced by U NION  calls, the asymptotic running
time remains unchanged.
Lemma 19.7
Suppose that we convert a sequence S ′ of m ′ M AKE -S ET , U NION , and F IND -
S ET  operations into a sequence S  of m  M AKE -S ET , L INK , and F IND -S ET
operations by turning each U NION  into two F IND -S ET  operations followed by
one L INK . Then, if sequence S  runs in O ( mα ( n )) time, sequence S ′ runs in
O ( m ′ α ( n )) time.
Proof    Since each U NION  operation in sequence S ′ is converted into three
operations in S , we have m ′ ≤ m  ≤ 3 m ′, so that m  = Θ( m ′), Thus, an O ( m
α ( n )) time bound for the converted sequence S  implies an O ( m ′ α ( n )) time
bound for the original sequence S ′.
▪
From now on, we assume that the initial sequence of m ′ M AKE -S ET ,
U NION , and F IND -S ET  operations has been converted to a sequence of m
M AKE -S ET , L INK , and F IND -S ET  operations. W e now prove an O ( m α ( n )) time
bound for the converted sequence and appeal to Lemma 19.7 to prove the
O ( m ′ α ( n )) running time of the original sequence of m ′ operations.
Potential function
The potential function we use assigns a potential ϕq ( x ) to each node x  in the
disjoint-set forest after q  operations. For the potential Φq  of the entire forest
after q  operations, sum the individual node potentials: 
 .
Because the forest is empty before the first operation, the sum is taken over
an empty set, and so Φ0  = 0. No potential Φq  is ever negative.
The value of ϕq ( x ) depends on whether x  is a tree root after the q th
operation. If it is, or if x . rank  = 0, then ϕq ( x ) = α ( n ) · x . rank .
Now suppose that after the q th operation, x  is not a root and that x . rank  ≥
1. W e need to define two auxiliary functions on x  before we can define
ϕq ( x ). First we define

Page number: 639
That is, level( x ) is the greatest level k  for which Ak , applied to x ’ s rank, is no
greater than x ’ s parent’ s rank.
W e claim that
which we see as follows. W e have
x . p . rank ≥ x . rank  + 1 (by Lemma 19.4 because x  is not a root)
= A 0 ( x . rank ) (by the definition (19.1) of A 0 ( j )),
which implies that level( x ) ≥ 0, and
A α ( n ) ( x . rank ) ≥ A α ( n ) (1) (because A k ( j ) is strictly increasing)
≥ n (by the definition (19.2) of α ( n ))
> x . p . rank (by Lemma 19.6),
which implies that level( x ) < α ( n ).
For a given nonroot node x , the value of level( x ) monotonically increases
over time. Why? Because x  is not a root, its rank does not change. The rank
of x . p  monotonically increases over time, since if x . p  is not a root then its
rank does not change, and if x . p  is a root then its rank can never decrease.
Thus, the dif ference between x . rank  and x . p . rank  monotonically increases
over time. Therefore, the value of k  needed for Ak ( x . rank ) to overtake
x . p . rank  monotonically increases over time as well.
The second auxiliary function applies when x . rank  ≥ 1: iter( x ) = max
That is, iter( x ) is the lar gest number of times we can iteratively apply
Alevel( x ) , applied initially to x ’ s rank, before exceeding x ’ s parent’ s rank.
W e claim that when x . rank  ≥ 1, we have
which we see as follows. W e have
x . p . rank ≥ A level( x ) ( x . rank ) (by the definition (19.3) of level( x ))
=
 (by the definition (3.30) of functional iteration),
which implies that iter( x ) ≥ 1. W e also have
Page number: 640
= A level( x )+1 ( x . rank ) (by the definition (19.1) of A k ( j ))
> x . p . rank (by the definition (19.3) of level( x )),
which implies that iter( x ) ≤ x . rank . Note that because x . p . rank  monotonically
increases over time, in order for iter( x ) to decrease, level( x ) must increase.
As long as level( x ) remains unchanged, iter( x ) must either increase or remain
unchanged.
W ith these auxiliary functions in place, we are ready to define the
potential of node x  after q  operations:
W e next investigate some useful properties of node potentials.
Lemma 19.8
For every node x , and for all operation counts q , we have
0 ≤ ϕq ( x ) ≤ α ( n ) · x . rank .
Proof    If x  is a root or x . rank  = 0, then ϕq ( x ) = α ( n ) · x . rank  by definition.
Now suppose that x  is not a root and that x . rank  ≥ 1. W e can obtain a lower
bound on ϕq ( x ) by maximizing level( x ) and iter( x ). The bounds (19.4) and
(19.6) give α ( n ) − level( x ) ≥ 1 and iter( x ) ≤ x . rank . Thus, we have
ϕ q ( x ) = ( α ( n ) − level( x )) · x . rank  − iter( x )
≥ x . rank  − x . rank
= 0.
Similarly , minimizing level( x ) and iter( x ) provides an upper bound on ϕq ( x ).
By the bound (19.4), level( x ) ≥ 0, and by the bound (19.6), iter( x ) ≥ 1. Thus,
we have
ϕ q ( x ) ≤ ( α ( n ) − 0) · x . rank  − 1
= α ( n ) · x . rank  − 1
< α ( n ) · x . rank .
▪
Page number: 641
Corollary 19.9
If node x  is not a root and x . rank >  0, then ϕq ( x ) < α ( n ) · x . rank .
Potential changes and amortized costs of operations
W e are now ready to examine how the disjoint-set operations af fect node
potentials. Once we understand how each operation can change the potential,
we can determine the amortized costs.
Lemma 19.10
Let x  be a node that is not a root, and suppose that the q th operation is either
a L INK  or a F IND -S ET . Then after the q th operation, ϕq ( x ) ≤ ϕq −1 ( x ).
Moreover , if x . rank  ≥ 1 and either level( x ) or iter( x ) changes due to the q th
operation, then ϕq ( x ) ≤ ϕq −1 ( x ) − 1. That is, x ’ s potential cannot increase,
and if it has positive rank and either level( x ) or iter( x ) changes, then x ’ s
potential drops by at least 1.
Proof    Because x  is not a root, the q th operation does not change x . rank , and
because n  does not change after the initial n  M AKE -S ET  operations, α ( n )
remains unchanged as well. Hence, these components of the formula for x ’ s
potential remain the same after the q th operation. If x . rank  = 0, then ϕq ( x ) =
ϕq −1 ( x ) = 0.
Now assume that x . rank  ≥ 1. Recall that level( x ) monotonically increases
over time. If the q th operation leaves level( x ) unchanged, then iter( x ) either
increases or remains unchanged. If both level( x ) and iter( x ) are unchanged,
then ϕq ( x ) = ϕq −1 ( x ). If level( x ) is unchanged and iter( x ) increases, then it
increases by at least 1, and so ϕq ( x ) ≤ ϕq −1 ( x ) − 1.
Finally , if the q th operation increases level( x ), it increases by at least 1, so
that the value of the term ( α ( n ) − level( x )) · x . rank  drops by at least x . rank .
Because level( x ) increased, the value of iter( x ) might drop, but according to
the bound (19.6), the drop is by at most x . rank  − 1. Thus, the increase in
potential due to the change in iter( x ) is less than the decrease in potential due
to the change in level( x ), yielding ϕq ( x ) ≤ ϕq −1 ( x ) − 1.
▪
Our final three lemmas show that the amortized cost of each M AKE -S ET ,
L INK , and F IND -S ET  operation is O ( α ( n )). Recall from equation (16.2) on
Page number: 642
page 456 that the amortized cost of each operation is its actual cost plus the
change in potential due to the operation.
Lemma 19.1 1
The amortized cost of each M AKE -S ET  operation is O (1).
Proof    Suppose that the q th operation is M AKE -S ET ( x ). This operation
creates node x  with rank 0, so that ϕq ( x ) = 0. No other ranks or potentials
change, and so Φq  = Φq −1 . Noting that the actual cost of the M AKE -S ET
operation is O (1) completes the proof.
▪
Lemma 19.12
The amortized cost of each L INK  operation is O ( α ( n )).
Proof    Suppose that the q th operation is L INK ( x , y ). The actual cost of the
L INK  operation is O (1). W ithout loss of generality , suppose that the L INK
makes y  the parent of x .
T o determine the change in potential due to the L INK , note that the only
nodes whose potentials may change are x , y , and the children of y  just prior
to the operation. W e’ll show that the only node whose potential can increase
due to the L INK  is y , and that its increase is at most α ( n ):
By Lemma 19.10, any node that is y ’ s child just before the L INK
cannot have its potential increase due to the L INK .
From the definition (19.7) of ϕq ( x ), note that, since x  was a root just
before the q th operation, ϕq −1 ( x ) = α ( n ) · x . rank  at that time. If x . rank
= 0, then ϕq ( x ) = ϕq −1 ( x ) = 0. Otherwise,
ϕ q ( x ) < α ( n ) · x . rank (by Corollary 19.9)
= ϕ q −1 ( x ),
and so x ’ s potential decreases.
Because y  is a root prior to the L INK , ϕq −1 ( y ) = α ( n ) · y . rank . After the
L INK  operation, y  remains a root, so that y ’ s potential still equals α ( n )
times its rank after the operation. The L INK  operation either leaves y ’ s
Page number: 643
rank alone or increases y ’ s rank by 1. Therefore, either ϕq ( y ) = ϕq −1 ( y )
or ϕq ( y ) = ϕq −1 ( y ) + α ( n ).
The increase in potential due to the L INK  operation, therefore, is at most
α ( n ). The amortized cost of the L INK  operation is O (1) + α ( n ) = O ( α ( n )).
▪
Lemma 19.13
The amortized cost of each F IND -S ET  operation is O ( α ( n )).
Proof    Suppose that the q th operation is a F IND -S ET  and that the find path
contains s  nodes. The actual cost of the F IND -S ET  operation is O ( s ). W e will
show that no node’ s potential increases due to the F IND -S ET  and that at least
max {0, s  − ( α ( n ) + 2)} nodes on the find path have their potential decrease
by at least 1.
W e first show that no node’ s potential increases. Lemma 19.10 takes care
of all nodes other than the root. If x  is the root, then its potential is α ( n ) ·
x . rank , which does not change due to the F IND -S ET  operation.
Now we show that at least max {0, s  − ( α ( n ) + 2)} nodes have their
potential decrease by at least 1. Let x  be a node on the find path such that
x . rank >  0 and x  is followed somewhere on the find path by another node y
that is not a root, where level( y ) = level( x ) just before the F IND -S ET
operation. (Node y  need not immediately  follow x  on the find path.) All but
at most α ( n ) + 2 nodes on the find path satisfy these constraints on x . Those
that do not satisfy them are the first node on the find path (if it has rank 0),
the last node on the path (i.e., the root), and the last node w  on the path for
which level( w ) = k , for each k  = 0, 1, 2, … , α ( n )−1.
Consider such a node x . It has positive rank and is followed somewhere
on the find path by nonroot node y  such that level( y ) = level( x ) before the
path compression occurs. W e claim that the path compression decreases x ’ s
potential by at least 1. T o prove this claim, let k  = level( x ) = level( y ) and i  =
iter( x ) before the path compression occurs. Just prior to the path compression
caused by the F IND -S ET , we have
x . p . rank ≥
 (by the definition (19.5) of iter( x )),
y . p . rank ≥ A k ( y . rank ) (by the definition (19.3) of level( y )),
y . rank ≥ x . p . rank (by Corollary 19.5 and because y  follows x  on the find path).
Page number: 644
Putting these inequalities together gives
y . p . rank ≥ A k ( y . rank )
≥ A k ( x . p . rank ) (because A k ( j ) is strictly increasing)
≥
=
 (by the definition (3.30) of functional iteration).
Because path compression makes x  and y  have the same parent, after path
compression we have x . p . rank  = y . p . rank . The parent of y  might change due
to the path compression, but if it does, the rank of y ’ s new parent compared
with the rank of y ’ s parent before path compression is either the same or
greater . Since x . rank  does not change, 
after path compression. By the definition (19.5) of the iter function, the
value of iter( x ) increases from i  to at least i  + 1. By Lemma 19.10, ϕq ( x ) ≤
ϕq −1 ( x ) − 1, so that x ’ s potential decreases by at least 1.
The amortized cost of the F IND -S ET  operation is the actual cost plus the
change in potential. The actual cost is O ( s ), and we have shown that the total
potential decreases by at least max {0, s  − ( α ( n ) + 2)}. The amortized cost,
therefore, is at most O ( s ) − ( s  − ( α ( n ) + 2)) = O ( s ) − s  + O ( α ( n )) = O ( α ( n )),
since we can scale up the units of potential to dominate the constant hidden
in O ( s ). (See Exercise 19.4-6.)
▪
Putting the preceding lemmas together yields the following theorem.
Theorem 19.14
A sequence of m  M AKE -S ET , U NION , and F IND -S ET  operations, n  of which are
M AKE -S ET  operations, can be performed on a disjoint-set forest with union
by rank and path compression in O ( m α ( n )) time.
Proof    Immediate from Lemmas 19.7, 19.1 1, 19.12, and 19.13.
▪
Exer cises
19.4-1
Prove Lemma 19.4.
Page number: 645
19.4-2
Prove that every node has rank at most ⌊ lg n ⌋ .
19.4-3
In light of Exercise 19.4-2, how many bits are necessary to store x . rank  for
each node x ?
19.4-4
Using Exercise 19.4-2, give a simple proof that operations on a disjoint-set
forest with union by rank but without path compression run in O ( m  lg n )
time.
19.4-5
Professor Dante reasons that because node ranks increase strictly along a
simple path to the root, node levels must monotonically increase along the
path. In other words, if x . rank >  0 and x . p  is not a root, then level( x ) ≤
level( x . p ). Is the professor correct?
19.4-6
The proof of Lemma 19.13 ends with scaling the units of potential to
dominate the constant hidden in the O ( s ) term. T o be more precise in the
proof, you need to change the definition (19.7) of the potential function to
multiply each of the two cases by a constant, say c , that dominates the
constant in the O ( s ) term. How must the rest of the analysis change to
accommodate this updated potential function?
★  19.4-7
Consider the function α ′( n ) = min { k  : Ak (1) ≥ lg( n  + 1)}. Show that α ′( n ) ≤ 3
for all practical values of n  and, using Exercise 19.4-2, show how to modify
the potential-function ar gument to prove that performing a sequence of m
M AKE -S ET , U NION , and F IND -S ET  operations, n  of which are M AKE -S ET
operations, on a disjoint-set forest with union by rank and path compression
takes O ( mα ′( n )) time.
Pr oblems
19-1     Of fline minimum
Page number: 646
In the of fline minimum problem , you maintain a dynamic set T  of elements
from the domain {1, 2, … , n } under the operations I NSER T  and E XTRACT -
M IN . The input is a sequence S  of n  I NSER T  and m  E XTRACT -M IN  calls, where
each key in {1, 2, … , n } is inserted exactly once. Y our goal is to determine
which key is returned by each E XTRACT -M IN  call. Specifically , you must fill
in an array extracted [1: m ], where for i  = 1, 2, … , m , extracted [ i ] is the key
returned by the i th E XTRACT -M IN  call. The problem is “of fline” in the sense
that you are allowed to process the entire sequence S  before determining any
of the returned keys.
a.  Consider the following instance of the of fline minimum problem, in
which each operation I NSER T ( i ) is represented by the value of i  and each
E XTRACT -M IN  is represented by the letter E:
4, 8, E, 3, E, 9, 2, 6, E, E, E, 1, 7, E, 5.
Fill in the correct values in the extracted  array .
T o develop an algorithm for this problem, break the sequence S  into
homogeneous subsequences. That is, represent S  by
I1 , E, I2 , E, I3 , … , Im , E, Im +1 ,
where each E represents a single E XTRACT -M IN  call and each Ij  represents a
(possibly empty) sequence of I NSER T  calls. For each subsequence Ij , initially
place the keys inserted by these operations into a set Kj , which is empty if Ij
is empty . Then execute the O FFLINE -M INIMUM  procedure.
O FFLINE -M INIMUM ( m , n )
1 for  i  = 1 to  n
2 determine j  such that i  ∈  K j
3 if  j  ≠ m  + 1
4 extracted [ j ] = i
5 let l  be the smallest value greater than j  for which set K l  exists
6 K l  = K j  ∪  K l , destroying K j
7 r eturn  extracted
b.  Ar gue that the array extracted  returned by O FFLINE -M INIMUM  is correct.
c.  Describe how to implement O FFLINE -M INIMUM  ef ficiently with a disjoint-
set data structure. Give as tight a bound as you can on the worst-case
Page number: 647
running time of your implementation.
19-2     Depth determination
In the depth-determination problem , you maintain a forest ℱ  = { Ti } of
rooted trees under three operations:
M AKE -T REE ( v ) creates a tree whose only node is v .
F IND -D EPTH ( v ) returns the depth of node v  within its tree.
G RAFT ( r , v ) makes node r , which is assumed to be the root of a tree, become
the child of node v , which is assumed to be in a dif ferent tree from r  but
may or may not itself be a root.
a.  Suppose that you use a tree representation similar to a disjoint-set forest:
v . p  is the parent of node v , except that v . p  = v  if v  is a root. Suppose further
that you implement G RAFT ( r , v ) by setting r . p  = v  and F IND -D EPTH ( v ) by
following the find path from v  up to the root, returning a count of all nodes
other than v  encountered. Show that the worst-case running time of a
sequence of m  M AKE -T REE , F IND -D EPTH , and G RAFT  operations is Θ( m2).
By using the union-by-rank and path-compression heuristics, you can reduce
the worst-case running time. Use the disjoint-set forest S  = { Si }, where each
set Si  (which is itself a tree) corresponds to a tree Ti  in the forest ℱ . The tree
structure within a set Si , however , does not necessarily correspond to that of
Ti . In fact, the implementation of Si  does not record the exact parent-child
relationships but nevertheless allows you to determine any node’ s depth in
Ti .
The key idea is to maintain in each node v  a “pseudodistance” v . d , which
is defined so that the sum of the pseudodistances along the simple path from
v  to the root of its set Si  equals the depth of v  in Ti . That is, if the simple path
from v  to its root in Si  is v0 , v1 , … , vk , where v0  = v  and vk  is Si ’ s root, then
the depth of v  in Ti  is 
 .
b.  Give an implementation of M AKE -T REE .
c.  Show how to modify F IND -S ET  to implement F IND -D EPTH . Y our
implementation should perform path compression, and its running time
Page number: 648
should be linear in the length of the find path. Make sure that your
implementation updates pseudodistances correctly .
d.  Show how to implement G RAFT ( r , v ), which combines the sets containing
r  and v , by modifying the U NION  and L INK  procedures. Make sure that your
implementation updates pseudodistances correctly . Note that the root of a
set Si  is not necessarily the root of the corresponding tree Ti .
e.  Give a tight bound on the worst-case running time of a sequence of m
M AKE -T REE , F IND -D EPTH , and G RAFT  operations, n  of which are M AKE -
T REE  operations.
19-3     T arjan’ s of fline lowest-common-ancestors algorithm
The lowest common ancestor  of two nodes u  and v  in a rooted tree T  is the
node w  that is an ancestor of both u  and v  and that has the greatest depth in
T . In the of fline lowest-common-ancestors problem , you are given a rooted
tree T  and an arbitrary set P  = {{ u , v }} of unordered pairs of nodes in T , and
you wish to determine the lowest common ancestor of each pair in P .
T o solve the of fline lowest-common-ancestors problem, the LCA
procedure on the following page performs a tree walk of T  with the initial
call LCA( T . r oot ). Assume that each node is colored WHITE  prior to the walk.
a.  Ar gue that line 10 executes exactly once for each pair { u , v } ∈  P .
b.  Ar gue that at the time of the call LCA( u ), the number of sets in the
disjoint-set data structure equals the depth of u  in T .
LCA( u )
  1 M AKE -S ET ( u )
  2 F IND -S ET ( u ). ancestor  = u
  3 for  each child v  of u  in T
  4 LCA( v )
  5 U NION ( u , v )
  6 F IND -S ET ( u ). ancestor  = u
  7 u . color  = BLACK
  8 for  each node v  such that { u , v } ∈  P
  9 if  v . color  == BLACK
10 print “The lowest common ancestor of”
u  “and” v  “is” F IND -S ET ( v ). ancestor
Page number: 649
c.  Prove that LCA correctly prints the lowest common ancestor of u  and v
for each pair { u , v } ∈  P .
d.  Analyze the running time of LCA, assuming that you use the
implementation of the disjoint-set data structure in Section 19.3 .
Chapter notes
Many of the important results for disjoint-set data structures are due at least
in part to R. E. T arjan. Using aggregate analysis, T arjan [ 427 , 429 ] gave the
first tight upper bound in terms of the very slowly growing inverse 
  of
Ackermann’ s function. (The function Ak ( j ) given in Section 19.4  is similar to
Ackermann’ s function, and the function α ( n ) is similar to 
 . Both α ( n )
and 
  are at most 4 for all conceivable values of m  and n .) An upper
bound of O ( m  lg* n ) was proven earlier by Hopcroft and Ullman [ 5 , 227 ].
The treatment in Section 19.4  is adapted from a later analysis by T arjan
[ 431 ], which is based on an analysis by Kozen [ 270 ]. Harfst and Reingold
[ 209 ] give a potential-based version of T arjan’ s earlier bound.
T arjan and van Leeuwen [ 432 ] discuss variants on the path-compression
heuristic, including “one-pass methods,” which sometimes of fer better
constant factors in their performance than do two-pass methods. As with
T arjan’ s earlier analyses of the basic path-compression heuristic, the
analyses by T arjan and van Leeuwen are aggregate. Harfst and Reingold
[ 209 ] later showed how to make a small change to the potential function to
adapt their path-compression analysis to these one-pass variants. Goel et al.
[ 182 ] prove that linking disjoint-set trees randomly yields the same
asymptotic running time as union by rank. Gabow and T arjan [ 166 ] show
that in certain applications, the disjoint-set operations can be made to run in
O ( m ) time.
T arjan [ 428 ] showed that a lower bound of 
  time is required
for operations on any disjoint-set data structure satisfying certain technical
conditions. This lower bound was later generalized by Fredman and Saks
[ 155 ], who showed that in the worst case, 
  (lg n )-bit words
of memory must be accessed.
Page number: 650
Part VI    Graph Algorithms
Page number: 651
 
 
Intr oduction
Graph problems pervade computer science, and algorithms for working
with them are fundamental to the field. Hundreds of interesting
computational problems are couched in terms of graphs. This part touches
on a few of the more significant ones.
Chapter 20  shows how to represent a graph in a computer and then
discusses algorithms based on searching a graph using either breadth-first
search or depth-first search. The chapter gives two applications of depth-
first search: topologically sorting a directed acyclic graph and decomposing
a directed graph into its strongly connected components.
Chapter 21  describes how to compute a minimum-weight spanning tree
of a graph: the least-weight way of connecting all of the vertices together
when each edge has an associated weight. The algorithms for computing
minimum spanning trees serve as good examples of greedy algorithms (see
Chapter 15 ).
Chapters 22  and 23  consider how to compute shortest paths between
vertices when each edge has an associated length or “weight.” Chapter 22
shows how to find shortest paths from a given source vertex to all other
vertices, and Chapter 23  examines methods to compute shortest paths
between every pair of vertices.
Chapter 24  shows how to compute a maximum flow of material in a
flow network, which is a directed graph having a specified source vertex of
material, a specified sink vertex, and specified capacities for the amount of
material that can traverse each directed edge. This general problem arises in
many forms, and a good algorithm for computing maximum flows can help
solve a variety of related problems ef ficiently .
Page number: 652
Finally , Chapter 25  explores matchings in bipartite graphs: methods for
pairing up vertices that are partitioned into two sets by selecting edges that
go between the sets. Bipartite-matching problems model several situations
that arise in the real world. The chapter examines how to find a matching of
maximum cardinality; the “stable-marriage problem,” which has the highly
practical application of matching medical residents to hospitals; and
assignment problems, which maximize the total weight of a bipartite
matching.
When we characterize the running time of a graph algorithm on a given
graph G  = ( V , E ), we usually measure the size of the input in terms of the
number of vertices | V | and the number of edges | E | of the graph. That is, we
denote the size of the input with two parameters, not just one. W e adopt a
common notational convention for these parameters. Inside asymptotic
notation (such as O -notation or Θ -notation), and only  inside such notation,
the symbol V  denotes | V  | and the symbol E  denotes | E |. For example, we
might say , “the algorithm runs in O ( VE ) time,” meaning that the algorithm
runs in O (| V | | E |) time. This convention makes the running-time formulas
easier to read, without risk of ambiguity .
Another convention we adopt appears in pseudocode. W e denote the
vertex set of a graph G  by G . V  and its edge set by G . E . That is, the
pseudocode views vertex and edge sets as attributes of a graph.
Page number: 653
20        Elementary Graph Algorithms
This chapter presents methods for representing a graph and for searching a
graph. Searching a graph means systematically following the edges of the
graph so as to visit the vertices of the graph. A graph-searching algorithm
can discover much about the structure of a graph. Many algorithms begin
by searching their input graph to obtain this structural information. Several
other graph algorithms elaborate on basic graph searching. T echniques for
searching a graph lie at the heart of the field of graph algorithms.
Section 20.1  discusses the two most common computational
representations of graphs: as adjacency lists and as adjacency matrices.
Section 20.2  presents a simple graph-searching algorithm called breadth-
first search and shows how to create a breadth-first tree. Section 20.3
presents depth-first search and proves some standard results about the order
in which depth-first search visits vertices. Section 20.4  provides our first
real application of depth-first search: topologically sorting a directed
acyclic graph. A second application of depth-first search, finding the
strongly connected components of a directed graph, is the topic of Section
20.5 .
20.1    Repr esentations of graphs
Y ou can choose between two standard ways to represent a graph G  = ( V , E ):
as a collection of adjacency lists or as an adjacency matrix. Either way
applies to both directed and undirected graphs. Because the adjacency-list
representation provides a compact way to represent sparse  graphs—those
for which | E | is much less than | V |2—it is usually the method of choice.
Page number: 654
Most of the graph algorithms presented in this book assume that an input
graph is represented in adjacency-list form. Y ou might prefer an adjacency-
matrix representation, however , when the graph is dense —| E | is close to | V |2
—or when you need to be able to tell quickly whether there is an edge
connecting two given vertices. For example, two of the all-pairs shortest-
paths algorithms presented in Chapter 23  assume that their input graphs are
represented by adjacency matrices.
Figur e 20.1  T wo representations of an undirected graph. (a)  An undirected graph G  with 5 vertices
and 7 edges. (b)  An adjacency-list representation of G . (c)  The adjacency-matrix representation of G .
Figur e 20.2  T wo representations of a directed graph. (a)  A directed graph G  with 6 vertices and 8
edges. (b)  An adjacency-list representation of G . (c)  The adjacency-matrix representation of G .
The adjacency-list representation  of a graph G  = ( V , E ) consists of an
array Adj  of | V | lists, one for each vertex in V . For each u  ∈  V , the
adjacency list Adj [ u ] contains all the vertices v  such that there is an edge ( u ,
v ) ∈  E . That is, Adj [ u ] consists of all the vertices adjacent to u  in G .
(Alternatively , it can contain pointers to these vertices.) Since the adjacency
lists represent the edges of a graph, our pseudocode treats the array Adj  as
an attribute of the graph, just like the edge set E . In pseudocode, therefore,
you will see notation such as G . Adj [ u ]. Figure 20.1(b)  is an adjacency-list
representation of the undirected graph in Figure 20.1(a) . Similarly , Figure
Page number: 655
20.2(b)  is an adjacency-list representation of the directed graph in Figure
20.2(a) .
If G  is a directed graph, the sum of the lengths of all the adjacency lists
is | E |, since an edge of the form ( u , v ) is represented by having v  appear in
Adj [ u ]. If G  is an undirected graph, the sum of the lengths of all the
adjacency lists is 2 | E |, since if ( u , v ) is an undirected edge, then u  appears
in v ’ s adjacency list and vice versa. For both directed and undirected
graphs, the adjacency-list representation has the desirable property that the
amount of memory it requires is Θ( V  + E ). Finding each edge in the graph
also takes Θ( V  + E ) time, rather than just Θ( E ), since each of the | V |
adjacency lists must be examined. Of course, if | E | = Ω( V )—such as in a
connected, undirected graph or a strongly connected, directed graph—we
can say that finding each edge takes Θ( E ) time.
Adjacency lists can also represent weighted graphs , that is, graphs for
which each edge has an associated weight  given by a weight function  w  : E
→ ℝ . For example, let G  = ( V , E ) be a weighted graph with weight function
w . Then you can simply store the weight w ( u , v ) of the edge ( u , v ) ∈  E  with
vertex v  in u ’ s adjacency list. The adjacency-list representation is quite
robust in that you can modify it to support many other graph variants.
A potential disadvantage of the adjacency-list representation is that it
provides no quicker way to determine whether a given edge ( u , v ) is present
in the graph than to search for v  in the adjacency list Adj [ u ]. An adjacency-
matrix representation of the graph remedies this disadvantage, but at the
cost of using asymptotically more memory . (See Exercise 20.1-8 for
suggestions of variations on adjacency lists that permit faster edge lookup.)
The adjacency-matrix representation  of a graph G  = ( V , E ) assumes
that the vertices are numbered 1, 2, … , | V | in some arbitrary manner . Then
the adjacency-matrix representation of a graph G  consists of a | V | × | V |
matrix A  = ( aij ) such that
Figures 20.1(c)  and 20.2(c)  are the adjacency matrices of the undirected and
directed graphs in Figures 20.1(a)  and 20.2(a) , respectively . The adjacency
matrix of a graph requires Θ( V2) memory , independent of the number of
edges in the graph. Because finding each edge in the graph requires
examining the entire adjacency matrix, doing so takes Θ( V2) time.
Page number: 656
Observe the symmetry along the main diagonal of the adjacency matrix
in Figure 20.1(c) . Since in an undirected graph, ( u , v ) and ( v , u ) represent
the same edge, the adjacency matrix A of an undirected graph is its own
transpose: A  = AT. In some applications, it pays to store only the entries on
and above the diagonal of the adjacency matrix, thereby cutting the memory
needed to store the graph almost in half.
Like the adjacency-list representation of a graph, an adjacency matrix
can represent a weighted graph. For example, if G  = ( V , E ) is a weighted
graph with edge-weight function w , you can store the weight w ( u , v ) of the
edge ( u , v ) ∈  E  as the entry in row u  and column v  of the adjacency matrix.
If an edge does not exist, you can store a NIL  value as its corresponding
matrix entry , though for many problems it is convenient to use a value such
as 0 or ∞.
Although the adjacency-list representation is asymptotically at least as
space-ef ficient as the adjacency-matrix representation, adjacency matrices
are simpler , and so you might prefer them when graphs are reasonably
small. Moreover , adjacency matrices carry a further advantage for
unweighted graphs: they require only one bit per entry .
Repr esenting attributes
Most algorithms that operate on graphs need to maintain attributes for
vertices and/or edges. W e indicate these attributes using our usual notation,
such as v .d  for an attribute d  of a vertex v . When we indicate edges as pairs
of vertices, we use the same style of notation. For example, if edges have an
attribute f , then we denote this attribute for edge ( u , v ) by ( u , v ). f . For the
purpose of presenting and understanding algorithms, our attribute notation
suf fices.
Implementing vertex and edge attributes in real programs can be another
story entirely . There is no one best way to store and access vertex and edge
attributes. For a given situation, your decision will likely depend on the
programming language you are using, the algorithm you are implementing,
and how the rest of your program uses the graph. If you represent a graph
using adjacency lists, one design choice is to represent vertex attributes in
additional arrays, such as an array d [1 : | V |] that parallels the Adj  array . If
the vertices adjacent to u  belong to Adj [ u ], then the attribute u.d  can
actually be stored in the array entry d [ u ]. Many other ways of implementing
attributes are possible. For example, in an object-oriented programming
Page number: 657
language, vertex attributes might be represented as instance variables within
a subclass of a V ertex class.
Exer cises
20.1-1
Given an adjacency-list representation of a directed graph, how long does it
take to compute the out-degree of every vertex? How long does it take to
compute the in-degrees?
20.1-2
Give an adjacency-list representation for a complete binary tree on 7
vertices. Give an equivalent adjacency-matrix representation. Assume that
the edges are undirected and that the vertices are numbered from 1 to 7 as in
a binary heap.
20.1-3
The transpose  of a directed graph G  = ( V , E ) is the graph GT = ( V , ET),
where ET = {( v , u ) ∈  V  × V  : ( u , v ) ∈  E }. That is, GT is G  with all its edges
reversed. Describe ef ficient algorithms for computing GT from G , for both
the adjacency-list and adjacency-matrix representations of G . Analyze the
running times of your algorithms.
20.1-4
Given an adjacency-list representation of a multigraph G  = ( V , E ), describe
an O ( V  + E )-time algorithm to compute the adjacency-list representation of
the “equivalent” undirected graph G ′ = ( V , E ′), where E ′ consists of the
edges in E  with all multiple edges between two vertices replaced by a single
edge and with all self-loops removed.
20.1-5
The square  of a directed graph G  = ( V , E ) is the graph G2 = ( V , E2) such
that ( u , v ) ∈  E2 if and only if G  contains a path with at most two edges
between u  and v . Describe ef ficient algorithms for computing G2 from G  for
both the adjacency-list and adjacency-matrix representations of G . Analyze
the running times of your algorithms.
20.1-6
Page number: 658
Most graph algorithms that take an adjacency-matrix representation as input
require Ω( V2) time, but there are some exceptions. Show how to determine
whether a directed graph G  contains a universal sink —a vertex with in-
degree | V | – 1 and out-degree 0—in O ( V ) time, given an adjacency matrix
for G .
20.1-7
The incidence matrix  of a directed graph G  = ( V , E ) with no self-loops is a
| V | × | E | matrix B  = ( bij ) such that
Describe what the entries of the matrix product BBT represent, where BT is
the transpose of B .
20.1-8
Suppose that instead of a linked list, each array entry Adj [ u ] is a hash table
containing the vertices v  for which ( u , v ) ∈  E , with collisions resolved by
chaining. Under the assumption of uniform independent hashing, if all edge
lookups are equally likely , what is the expected time to determine whether
an edge is in the graph? What disadvantages does this scheme have?
Suggest an alternate data structure for each edge list that solves these
problems. Does your alternative have disadvantages compared with the
hash table?
20.2    Br eadth-first sear ch
Breadth-first search  is one of the simplest algorithms for searching a graph
and the archetype for many important graph algorithms. Prim’ s minimum-
spanning-tree algorithm ( Section 21.2 ) and Dijkstra’ s single-source
shortest-paths algorithm ( Section 22.3 ) use ideas similar to those in breadth-
first search.
Given a graph G  = ( V , E ) and a distinguished source  vertex s , breadth-
first search systematically explores the edges of G  to “discover” every
vertex that is reachable from s . It computes the distance from s  to each
reachable vertex, where the distance to a vertex v  equals the smallest
Page number: 659
number of edges needed to go from s  to v . Breadth-first search also
produces a “breadth-first tree” with root s  that contains all reachable
vertices. For any vertex v  reachable from s , the simple path in the breadth-
first tree from s  to v  corresponds to a shortest path from s  to v  in G , that is, a
path containing the smallest number of edges. The algorithm works on both
directed and undirected graphs.
Breadth-first search is so named because it expands the frontier between
discovered and undiscovered vertices uniformly across the breadth of the
frontier . Y ou can think of it as discovering vertices in waves emanating
from the source vertex. That is, starting from s , the algorithm first discovers
all neighbors of s , which have distance 1. Then it discovers all vertices with
distance 2, then all vertices with distance 3, and so on, until it has
discovered every vertex reachable from s .
In order to keep track of the waves of vertices, breadth-first search could
maintain separate arrays or lists of the vertices at each distance from the
source vertex. Instead, it uses a single first-in, first-out queue (see Section
10.1.3 ) containing some vertices at a distance k , possibly followed by some
vertices at distance k  + 1. The queue, therefore, contains portions of two
consecutive waves at any time.
T o keep track of progress, breadth-first search colors each vertex white,
gray , or black. All vertices start out white, and vertices not reachable from
the source vertex s  stay white the entire time. A vertex that is reachable
from s  is discovered  the first time it is encountered during the search, at
which time it becomes gray , indicating that is now on the frontier of the
search: the boundary between discovered and undiscovered vertices. The
queue contains all the gray vertices. Eventually , all the edges of a gray
vertex will be explored, so that all of its neighbors will be discovered. Once
all of a vertex’ s edges have been explored, the vertex is behind the frontier
of the search, and it goes from gray to black.1
Breadth-first search constructs a breadth-first tree, initially containing
only its root, which is the source vertex s . Whenever the search discovers a
white vertex v  in the course of scanning the adjacency list of a gray vertex
u , the vertex v  and the edge ( u , v ) are added to the tree. W e say that u  is the
predecessor  or parent  of v  in the breadth-first tree. Since every vertex
reachable from s  is discovered at most once, each vertex reachable from s
has exactly one parent. (There is one exception: because s  is the root of the
breadth-first tree, it has no parent.) Ancestor and descendant relationships
Page number: 660
in the breadth-first tree are defined relative to the root s  as usual: if u  is on
the simple path in the tree from the root s  to vertex v , then u  is an ancestor
of v  and v  is a descendant of u .
The breadth-first-search procedure BFS on the following page assumes
that the graph G  = ( V , E ) is represented using adjacency lists. It denotes the
queue by Q , and it attaches three additional attributes to each vertex v  in the
graph:
v .color  is the color of v : WHITE , GRA Y , or BLACK .
v .d  holds the distance from the source vertex s  to v , as computed by
the algorithm.
v . π  is v ’ s predecessor in the breadth-first tree. If v  has no predecessor
because it is the source vertex or is undiscovered, then v . π  NIL .
Figure 20.3  illustrates the progress of BFS on an undirected graph.
The procedure BFS works as follows. W ith the exception of the source
vertex s , lines 1–4 paint every vertex white, set u.d  = ∞ for each vertex u ,
and set the parent of every vertex to be NIL . Because the source vertex s  is
always the first vertex discovered, lines 5–7 paint s  gray , set s.d  to 0, and set
the predecessor of s  to NIL . Lines 8–9 create the queue Q , initially
containing just the source vertex.
The while  loop of lines 10–18 iterates as long as there remain gray
vertices, which are on the frontier: discovered vertices that have not yet had
their adjacency lists fully examined. This while  loop maintains the
following invariant:
At the test in line 10, the queue Q  consists of the set of gray
vertices.
Although we won’ t use this loop invariant to prove correctness, it is easy to
see that it holds prior to the first iteration and that each iteration of the loop
maintains the invariant. Prior to the first iteration, the only gray vertex, and
the only vertex in Q , is the source vertex s . Line 1 1 determines the gray
vertex u  at the head of the queue Q  and removes it from Q . The for  loop of
lines 12–17 considers each vertex v  in the adjacency list of u . If v  is white,
then it has not yet been discovered, and the procedure discovers it by
executing lines 14–17. These lines paint vertex v  gray , set v ’ s distance v .d  to
u.d  + 1, record u  as v ’ s parent v .π , and place v  at the tail of the queue Q .
Page number: 661
Once the procedure has examined all the vertices on u ’ s adjacency list, it
blackens u  in line 18, indicating that u  is now behind the frontier . The loop
invariant is maintained because whenever a vertex is painted gray (in line
14) it is also enqueued (in line 17), and whenever a vertex is dequeued (in
line 1 1) it is also painted black (in line 18).
BFS( G, s )
  1 for  each vertex u  ∈  G.V  – { s }
  2 u.color  = WHITE
  3 u.d  = ∞
  4 u . π  NIL
  5 s.color  = GRA Y
  6 s.d  = 0
  7 s . π  NIL
  8 Q  = Ø
  9 E NQUEUE ( Q, s )
10 while  Q  ≠ Ø
1 1 u  = D EQUEUE ( Q )
12 for  each vertex v  in G.Adj [ u ] // search the neighbors of u
13 if  v .color  == WHITE // is v  being discovered now?
14 v .color  = GRA Y
15 v .d  = u.d  + 1
16 v . π  = u
17 E NQUEUEd ( Q , v ) // v  is now on the frontier
18 u.color  = BLACK // u  is now behind the frontier
The results of breadth-first search may depend upon the order in which
the neighbors of a given vertex are visited in line 12: the breadth-first tree
may vary , but the distances d  computed by the algorithm do not. (See
Exercise 20.2-5.)
A simple change allows the BFS procedure to terminate in many cases
before the queue Q  becomes empty . Because each vertex is discovered at
most once and receives a finite d  value only when it is discovered, the
algorithm can terminate once every vertex has a finite d  value. If BFS keeps
count of how many vertices have been discovered, it can terminate once
either the queue Q  is empty or all | V | vertices are discovered.
Page number: 662
Figur e 20.3  The operation of BFS on an undirected graph. Each part shows the graph and the queue
Q  at the beginning of each iteration of the while  loop of lines 10–18. V ertex distances appear within
each vertex and below vertices in the queue. The tan region surrounds the frontier of the search,
consisting of the vertices in the queue. The light blue region surrounds the vertices behind the
frontier , which have been dequeued. Each part highlights in orange the vertex dequeued and the
breadth-first tree edges added, if any , in the previous iteration. Blue edges belong to the breadth-first
tree constructed so far .
Analysis
Before proving the various properties of breadth-first search, let’ s take on
the easier job of analyzing its running time on an input graph G  = ( V , E ).
W e use aggregate analysis, as we saw in Section 16.1 . After initialization,
breadth-first search never whitens a vertex, and thus the test in line 13
ensures that each vertex is enqueued at most once, and hence dequeued at
Page number: 663
most once. The operations of enqueuing and dequeuing take O (1) time, and
so the total time devoted to queue operations is O ( V ). Because the
procedure scans the adjacency list of each vertex only when the vertex is
dequeued, it scans each adjacency list at most once. Since the sum of the
lengths of all | V | adjacency lists is Θ( E ), the total time spent in scanning
adjacency lists is O ( V  + E ). The overhead for initialization is O ( V ), and thus
the total running time of the BFS procedure is O ( V  + E ). Thus, breadth-first
search runs in time linear in the size of the adjacency-list representation of
G .
Shortest paths
Now , let’ s see why breadth-first search finds the shortest distance from a
given source vertex s  to each vertex in a graph. Define the shortest-path
distance  δ( s , v ) from s  to v  as the minimum number of edges in any path
from vertex s  to vertex v . If there is no path from s  to v , then δ( s , v ) = ∞. W e
call a path of length δ( s , v ) from s  to v  a shortest path2 from s  to v . Before
showing that breadth-first search correctly computes shortest-path
distances, we investigate an important property of shortest-path distances.
Lemma 20.1
Let G  = ( V , E ) be a directed or undirected graph, and let s  ∈  V  be an
arbitrary vertex. Then, for any edge ( u , v ) ∈  E ,
δ( s , v ) ≤ δ( s , u ) + 1.
Proof    If u  is reachable from s , then so is v . In this case, the shortest path
from s  to v  cannot be longer than the shortest path from s  to u  followed by
the edge ( u , v ), and thus the inequality holds. If u  is not reachable from s ,
then δ( s , u ) = ∞, and again, the inequality holds.
▪
Our goal is to show that the BFS procedure properly computes v .d  = δ( s ,
v ) for each vertex v  ∈  V . W e first show that v .d  bounds δ( s , v ) from above.
Lemma 20.2
Let G  = ( V , E ) be a directed or undirected graph, and suppose that BFS is
run on G  from a given source vertex s  ∈  V . Then, for each vertex v  ∈  V ,
the value v .d  computed by BFS satisfies v .d  ≥ δ( s , v ) at all times, including
at termination.
Page number: 664
Proof    The lemma is true intuitively , because any finite value assigned to
v .d  equals the number of edges on some path from s  to v . The formal proof
is by induction on the number of E NQUEUE  operations. The inductive
hypothesis is that v .d  ≥ δ( s , v ) for all v  ∈  V .
The base case of the induction is the situation immediately after
enqueuing s  in line 9 of BFS. The inductive hypothesis holds here, because
s.d  = 0 = δ( s , s ) and v .d  = 1 ∞ δ( s , v ) for all v  ∈  V  – { s }.
For the inductive step, consider a white vertex v  that is discovered
during the search from a vertex u . The inductive hypothesis implies that u.d
≥ δ( s , u ). The assignment performed by line 15 and Lemma 20.1 give
v .d = u.d  + 1
≥ δ( s , u ) + 1
≥ δ( s , v ).
V ertex v  is then enqueued, and it is never enqueued again because it is also
grayed and lines 14–17 execute only for white vertices. Thus, the value of
v .d  never changes again, and the inductive hypothesis is maintained.
▪
T o prove that v .d  = δ( s , v ), we first show more precisely how the queue
Q  operates during the course of BFS. The next lemma shows that at all
times, the d  values of vertices in the queue either are all the same or form a
sequence 〈 k , k , … , k , k  + 1, k  + 1, … , k  + 1 〉  for some integer k  ≥ 0.
Lemma 20.3
Suppose that during the execution of BFS on a graph G  = ( V , E ), the queue
Q  contains the vertices 〈 v1 , v2 , … , vr〉 , where v1  is the head of Q  and vr  is
the tail. Then, vr .d  ≤ v1 . d  + 1 and vi .d  ≤ vi +1 . d  for i  = 1, 2, … , r  – 1.
Proof    The proof is by induction on the number of queue operations.
Initially , when the queue contains only s , the lemma trivially holds.
For the inductive step, we must prove that the lemma holds after both
dequeuing and enqueuing a vertex. First, we examine dequeuing. When the
head v1  of the queue is dequeued, v2  becomes the new head. (If the queue
becomes empty , then the lemma holds vacuously .) By the inductive
hypothesis, v1 . d  ≤ v2 . d . But then we have vr .d  ≤ v1 . d +1 ≤ v2 . d  + 1, and the
Page number: 665
remaining inequalities are unaf fected. Thus, the lemma follows with v2  as
the new head.
Now , we examine enqueuing. When line 17 of BFS enqueues a vertex v
onto a queue containing vertices 〈 v1 , v2 , … , vr〉 , the enqueued vertex
becomes vr +1 . If the queue was empty before v  was enqueued, then after
enqueuing v , we have r  = 1 and the lemma trivially holds. Now suppose that
the queue was nonempty when v  was enqueued. At that time, the procedure
has most recently removed vertex u , whose adjacency list is currently being
scanned, from the queue Q . Just before u  was removed, we had u  = v1  and
the inductive hypothesis held, so that u.d  ≤ v2 . d  and vr .d  ≤ u.d  + 1. After u  is
removed from the queue, the vertex that had been v2  becomes the new head
v1  of the queue, so that now u.d  ≤ v1 . d . Thus, vr +1 . d  = v .d  = u.d  + 1 ≤ v1 . d  +
1. Since vr .d  ≤ u.d  + 1, we have vr .d  ≤ u.d  + 1 = v .d  = vr +1 . d , and the
remaining inequalities are unaf fected. Thus, the lemma follows when v  is
enqueued.
▪
The following corollary shows that the d  values at the time that vertices
are enqueued monotonically increase over time.
Corollary 20.4
Suppose that vertices vi  and vj  are enqueued during the execution of BFS,
and that vi  is enqueued before vj . Then vi .d  ≤ vj .d  at the time that vj  is
enqueued.
Proof    Immediate from Lemma 20.3 and the property that each vertex
receives a finite d  value at most once during the course of BFS.
▪
W e can now prove that breadth-first search correctly finds shortest-path
distances.
Theorem 20.5 (Correctness of breadth-first search)
Let G  = ( V , E ) be a directed or undirected graph, and suppose that BFS is
run on G  from a given source vertex s  ∈  V . Then, during its execution, BFS
discovers every vertex v  ∈  V  that is reachable from the source s , and upon
termination, v .d  = δ( s , v ) for all v  ∈  V . Moreover , for any vertex v  ≠ s  that is
Page number: 666
reachable from s , one of the shortest paths from s  to v  is a shortest path
from s  to v . π  followed by the edge ( v . π , v ).
Proof    Assume for the purpose of contradiction that some vertex receives a
d  value not equal to its shortest-path distance. Of all such vertices, let v  be a
vertex that has the minimum δ( s , v ). By Lemma 20.2, we have v .d  ≥ δ( s , v ),
and thus v .d  > δ( s , v ). W e cannot have v  = s , because s.d  = 0 and δ( s , s ) = 0.
V ertex v  must be reachable from s , for otherwise we would have δ( s , v ) = ∞
≥ v .d . Let u  be the vertex immediately preceding v  on some shortest path
from s  to v  (since v  ≠ s , vertex u  must exist), so that δ( s , v ) = δ( s , u )+1.
Because δ( s , u ) < δ( s , v ), and because of how we chose v , we have u.d  = δ( s ,
u ). Putting these properties together gives
Now consider the time when BFS chooses to dequeue vertex u  from Q
in line 1 1. At this time, vertex v  is either white, gray , or black. W e shall
show that each of these cases leads to a contradiction of inequality (20.1). If
v  is white, then line 15 sets v .d  = u.d  + 1, contradicting inequality (20.1). If
v  is black, then it was already removed from the queue and, by Corollary
20.4, we have v .d  ≤ u.d , again contradicting inequality (20.1). If v  is gray ,
then it was painted gray upon dequeuing some vertex w , which was
removed from Q  earlier than u  and for which v .d  = w .d  + 1. By Corollary
20.4, however , w .d  ≤ u.d , and so v .d  = w .d  + 1 ≤ u.d  + 1, once again
contradicting inequality (20.1).
Thus we conclude that v .d  = δ( s , v ) for all v  ∈  V . All vertices v  reachable
from s  must be discovered, for otherwise they would have ∞ = v .d  > δ( s , v ).
T o conclude the proof of the theorem, observe from lines 15–16 that if v . π  =
u , then v .d  = u.d  + 1. Thus, to form a shortest path from s  to v , take a
shortest path from s  to v . π  and then traverse the edge ( v . π  v ).
▪
Br eadth-first tr ees
The blue edges in Figure 20.3  show the breadth-first tree built by the BFS
procedure as it searches the graph. The tree corresponds to the π  attributes.
More formally , for a graph G  = ( V , E ) with source s , we define the
predecessor subgraph  of G  as Gπ  = ( Vπ , Eπ ), where
Page number: 667
and
The predecessor subgraph Gπ  is a breadth-first tree  if Vπ  consists of the
vertices reachable from s  and, for all v  ∈  Vπ , the subgraph Gπ  contains a
unique simple path from s  to v  that is also a shortest path from s  to v  in G . A
breadth-first tree is in fact a tree, since it is connected and | Eπ | = | Vπ | − 1
(see Theorem B.2 on page 1 169). W e call the edges in Eπ tree edges .
The following lemma shows that the predecessor subgraph produced by
the BFS procedure is a breadth-first tree.
Lemma 20.6
When applied to a directed or undirected graph G  = ( V , E ), procedure BFS
constructs π  so that the predecessor subgraph Gπ  = ( Vπ , Eπ ) is a breadth-first
tree.
Proof    Line 16 of BFS sets v . π  = u  if and only if ( u , v ) = E  and δ( s , v ) < ∞
—that is, if v  is reachable from s —and thus Vπ  consists of the vertices in V
reachable from s . Since the predecessor subgraph Gπ  forms a tree, by
Theorem B.2, it contains a unique simple path from s  to each vertex in Vπ .
Applying Theorem 20.5 inductively yields that every such path is a shortest
path in G .
The P RINT -P A TH  procedure prints out the vertices on a shortest path from
s  to v , assuming that BFS has already computed a breadth-first tree. This
procedure runs in time linear in the number of vertices in the path printed,
since each recursive call is for a path one vertex shorter .
P RINT -P A TH ( G , s , v )
  1 if  v  == s
  2 print s
  3 elseif  v . π  == NIL
  4 print “no path from” s  “to” v  “exists”
  5 else  P RINT -P A TH ( G , s , v . π )
  6 print v
Page number: 668
Exer cises
20.2-1
Show the d  and π  values that result from running breadth-first search on the
directed graph of Figure 20.2(a) , using vertex 3 as the source.
20.2-2
Show the d  and π  values that result from running breadth-first search on the
undirected graph of Figure 20.3 , using vertex u  as the source. Assume that
neighbors of a vertex are visited in alphabetical order .
20.2-3
Show that using a single bit to store each vertex color suf fices by ar guing
that the BFS procedure produces the same result if line 18 is removed. Then
show how to obviate the need for vertex colors altogether .
20.2-4
What is the running time of BFS if we represent its input graph by an
adjacency matrix and modify the algorithm to handle this form of input?
20.2-5
Ar gue that in a breadth-first search, the value u.d  assigned to a vertex u  is
independent of the order in which the vertices appear in each adjacency list.
Using Figure 20.3  as an example, show that the breadth-first tree computed
by BFS can depend on the ordering within adjacency lists.
20.2-6
Give an example of a directed graph G  = ( V , E ), a source vertex s  ∈  V , and
a set of tree edges Eπ  ⊆  E  such that for each vertex v  ∈  V , the unique
simple path in the graph ( V , Eπ ) from s  to v  is a shortest path in G , yet the
set of edges Eπ  cannot be produced by running BFS on G , no matter how
the vertices are ordered in each adjacency list.
20.2-7
There are two types of professional wrestlers: “faces” (short for
“babyfaces,” i.e., “good guys”) and “heels” (“bad guys”). Between any pair
of professional wrestlers, there may or may not be a rivalry . Y ou are given
the names of n  professional wrestlers and a list of r  pairs of wrestlers for
which there are rivalries. Give an O ( n  + r )-time algorithm that determines
Page number: 669
whether it is possible to designate some of the wrestlers as faces and the
remainder as heels such that each rivalry is between a face and a heel. If it
is possible to perform such a designation, your algorithm should produce it.
★  20.2-8
The diameter  of a tree T  = ( V , E ) is defined as max {δ( u , v ) : u , v  ∈  V }, that
is, the lar gest of all shortest-path distances in the tree. Give an ef ficient
algorithm to compute the diameter of a tree, and analyze the running time
of your algorithm.
20.3    Depth-first sear ch
As its name implies, depth-first search searches “deeper” in the graph
whenever possible. Depth-first search explores edges out of the most
recently discovered vertex v  that still has unexplored edges leaving it. Once
all of v ’ s edges have been explored, the search “backtracks” to explore
edges leaving the vertex from which v  was discovered. This process
continues until all vertices that are reachable from the original source vertex
have been discovered. If any undiscovered vertices remain, then depth-first
search selects one of them as a new source, repeating the search from that
source. The algorithm repeats this entire process until it has discovered
every vertex.3
As in breadth-first search, whenever depth-first search discovers a
vertex v  during a scan of the adjacency list of an already discovered vertex
u , it records this event by setting v ’ s predecessor attribute v . π  to u . Unlike
breadth-first search, whose predecessor subgraph forms a tree, depth-first
search produces a predecessor subgraph that might contain several trees,
because the search may repeat from multiple sources. Therefore, we define
the predecessor subgraph  of a depth-first search slightly dif ferently from
that of a breadth-first search: it always includes all vertices, and it accounts
for multiple sources. Specifically , for a depth-first search the predecessor
subgraph is Gπ  = ( V , Eπ ), where
Eπ  = {( v . π , v ) : v  ∈  V  and v . π  ≠ NIL }.
The predecessor subgraph of a depth-first search forms a depth-first forest
comprising several depth-first trees . The edges in Eπ  are tree edges .
Page number: 670
Like breadth-first search, depth-first search colors vertices during the
search to indicate their state. Each vertex is initially white, is grayed when it
is discovered  in the search, and is blackened when it is finished , that is,
when its adjacency list has been examined completely . This technique
guarantees that each vertex ends up in exactly one depth-first tree, so that
these trees are disjoint.
Besides creating a depth-first forest, depth-first search also timestamps
each vertex. Each vertex v  has two timestamps: the first timestamp v .d
records when v  is first discovered (and grayed), and the second timestamp
v .f  records when the search finishes examining v ’ s adjacency list (and
blackens v ). These timestamps provide important information about the
structure of the graph and are generally helpful in reasoning about the
behavior of depth-first search.
The procedure DFS on the facing page records when it discovers vertex
u  in the attribute u.d  and when it finishes vertex u  in the attribute u.f . These
timestamps are integers between 1 and 2 | V |, since there is one discovery
event and one finishing event for each of the | V | vertices. For every vertex
u ,
V ertex u  is WHITE  before time u.d , GRA Y  between time u.d  and time u.f , and
BLACK  thereafter . In the DFS procedure, the input graph G  may be
undirected or directed. The variable time  is a global variable used for
timestamping. Figure 20.4  illustrates the progress of DFS on the graph
shown in Figure 20.2  (but with vertices labeled by letters rather than
numbers).
DFS( G )
  1 for  each vertex u  ∈  G.V
  2 u.color  = WHITE
  3 u . π  = NIL
  4 time  = 0
  5 for  each vertex u  ∈  G.V
  6 if  u.color  == WHITE
  7 DFS-V ISIT ( G , u )
DFS-V ISIT ( G , u )
  1 time  = time  + 1 // white vertex u  has just been discovered
  2 u.d  = time
  3 u.color  = GRA Y
Page number: 671
  4 for  each vertex v  in G.Adj [ u ] // explore each edge ( u , v )
  5 if  v .color  == WHITE
  6 v . π  = u
  7 DFS-V ISIT ( G , v )
  8 time  = time  + 1
  9 u.f  = time
10 u.color  = BLACK // blacken u ; it is finished
The DFS procedure works as follows. Lines 1–3 paint all vertices white
and initialize their π  attributes to NIL . Line 4 resets the global time counter .
Lines 5–7 check each vertex in V  in turn and, when a white vertex is found,
visit it by calling DFS-V ISIT . Upon every call of DFS-V ISIT ( G , u ) in line 7,
vertex u  becomes the root of a new tree in the depth-first forest. When DFS
returns, every vertex u  has been assigned a discovery time  u.d  and a finish
time  u.f .
In each call DFS-V ISIT ( G , u ), vertex u  is initially white. Lines 1–3
increment the global variable time , record the new value of time  as the
discovery time u.d , and paint u  gray . Lines 4–7 examine each vertex v
adjacent to u  and recursively visit v  if it is white. As line 4 considers each
vertex v  ∈  Adj [ u ], the depth-first search explores  edge ( u , v ). Finally , after
every edge leaving u  has been explored, lines 8–10 increment time , record
the finish time in u.f , and paint u  black.
The results of depth-first search may depend upon the order in which
line 5 of DFS examines the vertices and upon the order in which line 4 of
DFS-V ISIT  visits the neighbors of a vertex. These dif ferent visitation orders
tend not to cause problems in practice, because many applications of depth-
first search can use the result from any depth-first search.
Page number: 672
Figur e 20.4  The progress of the depth-first-search algorithm DFS on a directed graph. Edges are
classified as they are explored: tree edges are labeled T , back edges B, forward edges F , and cross
edges C . T imestamps within vertices indicate discovery time/finish times. T ree edges are highlighted
in blue. Orange highlights indicate vertices whose discovery or finish times change and edges that are
explored in each step.
What is the running time of DFS? The loops on lines 1–3 and lines 5–7
of DFS take Θ( V ) time, exclusive of the time to execute the calls to DFS-
V ISIT . As we did for breadth-first search, we use aggregate analysis. The
procedure DFS-V ISIT  is called exactly once for each vertex v  ∈  V , since the
vertex u  on which DFS-V ISIT  is invoked must be white and the first thing
DFS-V ISIT  does is paint vertex u  gray . During an execution of DFS-
V ISIT ( G , v ), the loop in lines 4–7 executes | Adj [ v ]| times. Since Σv ∈ V  | Adj [ v ]|
= Θ( E ) and DFS-V ISIT  is called once per vertex, the total cost of executing
lines 4–7 of DFS-V ISIT  is Θ( V  + E ). The running time of DFS is therefore
Θ( V  + E ).
Pr operties of depth-first sear ch
Page number: 673
Depth-first search yields valuable information about the structure of a
graph. Perhaps the most basic property of depth-first search is that the
predecessor subgraph Gπ  does indeed form a forest of trees, since the
structure of the depth-first trees exactly mirrors the structure of recursive
calls of DFS-V ISIT . That is, u  = v . π  if and only if DFS-V ISIT ( G , v ) was
called during a search of u ’ s adjacency list. Additionally , vertex v  is a
descendant of vertex u  in the depth-first forest if and only if v  is discovered
during the time in which u  is gray .
Another important property of depth-first search is that discovery and
finish times have parenthesis structure . If the DFS-V ISIT  procedure were to
print a left parenthesis “( u ” when it discovers vertex u  and to print a right
parenthesis “ u )” when it finishes u , then the printed expression would be
well formed in the sense that the parentheses are properly nested. For
example, the depth-first search of Figure 20.5(a)  corresponds to the
parenthesization shown in Figure 20.5(b) . The following theorem provides
another way to characterize the parenthesis structure.
Theorem 20.7 (Parenthesis theorem)
In any depth-first search of a (directed or undirected) graph G  = ( V , E ), for
any two vertices u  and v , exactly one of the following three conditions
holds:
the intervals [ u.d , u.f ] and [ v .d , v .f ] are entirely disjoint, and neither u
nor v  is a descendant of the other in the depth-first forest,
the interval [ u.d , u.f ] is contained entirely within the interval [ v .d , v .f ],
and u  is a descendant of v  in a depth-first tree, or
the interval [ v .d , v .f ] is contained entirely within the interval [ u.d , u.f ],
and v  is a descendant of u  in a depth-first tree.
Proof    W e begin with the case in which u.d  < v .d . W e consider two
subcases, according to whether v .d  < u.f . The first subcase occurs when v .d
< u.f , so that v  was discovered while u  was still gray , which implies that v  is
a descendant of u . Moreover , since v  was discovered after u , all of its
outgoing edges are explored, and v  is finished, before the search returns to
and finishes u . In this case, therefore, the interval [ v .d , v .f ] is entirely
contained within the interval [ u.d , u.f ]. In the other subcase, u.f  < v .d , and
by inequality (20.4), u.d  < u.f  < v .d  < v .f , and thus the intervals [ u.d , u.f ] and
Page number: 674
[ v .d , v .f ] are disjoint. Because the intervals are disjoint, neither vertex was
discovered while the other was gray , and so neither vertex is a descendant
of the other .
Figur e 20.5  Properties of depth-first search. (a)  The result of a depth-first search of a directed graph.
V ertices are timestamped and edge types are indicated as in Figure 20.4 . (b)  Intervals for the
discovery time and finish time of each vertex correspond to the parenthesization shown. Each
rectangle spans the interval given by the discovery and finish times of the corresponding vertex. Only
tree edges are shown. If two intervals overlap, then one is nested within the other , and the vertex
corresponding to the smaller interval is a descendant of the vertex corresponding to the lar ger . (c)
The graph of part (a) redrawn with all tree and forward edges going down within a depth-first tree
and all back edges going up from a descendant to an ancestor .
The case in which v .d  < u.d  is similar , with the roles of u  and v  reversed
in the above ar gument.
▪
Corollary 20.8 (Nesting of descendants’ intervals)
V ertex v  is a proper descendant of vertex u  in the depth-first forest for a
(directed or undirected) graph G  if and only if u.d  < v .d  < v .f  < u.f .
Proof    Immediate from Theorem 20.7.
▪
The next theorem gives another important characterization of when one
vertex is a descendant of another in the depth-first forest.
Page number: 675
Theorem 20.9 (White-path theorem)
In a depth-first forest of a (directed or undirected) graph G  = ( V , E ), vertex
v  is a descendant of vertex u  if and only if at the time u.d  that the search
discovers u , there is a path from u  to v  consisting entirely of white vertices.
Proof    ⇒ : If v  = u , then the path from u  to v  contains just vertex u , which is
still white when u.d  receives a value. Now , suppose that v  is a proper
descendant of u  in the depth-first forest. By Corollary 20.8, u.d  < v .d , and so
v  is white at time u.d . Since v  can be any descendant of u , all vertices on the
unique simple path from u  to v  in the depth-first forest are white at time u.d .
⇐ : Suppose that there is a path of white vertices from u  to v  at time u.d ,
but v  does not become a descendant of u  in the depth-first tree. W ithout loss
of generality , assume that every vertex other than v  along the path becomes
a descendant of u . (Otherwise, let v  be the closest vertex to u  along the path
that doesn’ t become a descendant of u .) Let w  be the predecessor of v  in the
path, so that w  is a descendant of u  ( w  and u  may in fact be the same
vertex). By Corollary 20.8, w .f  ≤ u.f . Because v  must be discovered after u  is
discovered, but before w  is finished, u.d  < v .d  < w .f  ≤ u.f . Theorem 20.7 then
implies that the interval [ v .d , v .f ] is contained entirely within the interval
[ u.d , u.f ]. By Corollary 20.8, v  must after all be a descendant of u .
▪
Classification of edges
Y ou can obtain important information about a graph by classifying its edges
during a depth-first search. For example, Section 20.4  will show that a
directed graph is acyclic if and only if a depth-first search yields no “back”
edges (Lemma 20.1 1).
The depth-first forest Gπ  produced by a depth-first search on graph G
can contain four types of edges:
1 . T ree edges  are edges in the depth-first forest Gπ . Edge ( u , v ) is a tree
edge if v  was first discovered by exploring edge ( u , v ).
2 . Back edges  are those edges ( u , v ) connecting a vertex u  to an
ancestor v  in a depth-first tree. W e consider self-loops, which may
occur in directed graphs, to be back edges.
Page number: 676
3 . Forward edges  are those nontree edges ( u , v ) connecting a vertex u
to a proper descendant v  in a depth-first tree.
4 . Cross edges  are all other edges. They can go between vertices in the
same depth-first tree, as long as one vertex is not an ancestor of the
other , or they can go between vertices in dif ferent depth-first trees.
In Figures 20.4  and 20.5 , edge labels indicate edge types. Figure 20.5(c)
also shows how to redraw the graph of Figure 20.5(a)  so that all tree and
forward edges head downward in a depth-first tree and all back edges go
up. Y ou can redraw any graph in this fashion.
The DFS algorithm has enough information to classify some edges as it
encounters them. The key idea is that when an edge ( u , v ) is first explored,
the color of vertex v  says something about the edge:
1 . WHITE  indicates a tree edge,
2 . GRA Y  indicates a back edge, and
3 . BLACK  indicates a forward or cross edge.
The first case is immediate from the specification of the algorithm. For the
second case, observe that the gray vertices always form a linear chain of
descendants corresponding to the stack of active DFS-V ISIT  invocations.
The number of gray vertices is 1 more than the depth in the depth-first
forest of the vertex most recently discovered. Depth-first search always
explores from the deepest gray vertex, so that an edge that reaches another
gray vertex has reached an ancestor . The third case handles the remaining
possibility . Exercise 20.3-5 asks you to show that such an edge ( u , v ) is a
forward edge if u.d  < v .d  and a cross edge if u.d  > v .d .
According to the following theorem, forward and cross edges never
occur in a depth-first search of an undirected graph.
Theorem 20.10
In a depth-first search of an undirected graph G , every edge of G  is either a
tree edge or a back edge.
Proof    Let ( u , v ) be an arbitrary edge of G , and suppose without loss of
generality that u.d  < v .d . Then, while u  is gray , the search must discover and
finish v  before it finishes u , since v  is on u’ s adjacency list. If the first time
that the search explores edge ( u , v ), it is in the direction from u  to v , then v
Page number: 677
is undiscovered (white) until that time, for otherwise the search would have
explored this edge already in the direction from v  to u . Thus, ( u , v ) becomes
a tree edge. If the search explores ( u , v ) first in the direction from v  to u ,
then ( u , v ) is a back edge, since there must be a path of tree edges from u  to
v .
▪
Since ( u , v ) and ( v , u ) are really the same edge in an undirected graph,
the proof of Theorem 20.10 says how to classify the edge. When searching
from a vertex, which must be gray , if the adjacent vertex is white, then the
edge is a tree edge. Otherwise, the edge is a back edge.
The next two sections apply the above theorems about depth-first search.
Figur e 20.6  A directed graph for use in Exercises 20.3-2 and 20.5-2.
Exer cises
20.3-1
Make a 3-by-3 chart with row and column labels WHITE , GRA Y , and BLACK .
In each cell ( i , j ), indicate whether , at any point during a depth-first search
of a directed graph, there can be an edge from a vertex of color i  to a vertex
of color j . For each possible edge, indicate what edge types it can be. Make
a second such chart for depth-first search of an undirected graph.
20.3-2
Show how depth-first search works on the graph of Figure 20.6 . Assume
that the for  loop of lines 5–7 of the DFS procedure considers the vertices in
alphabetical order , and assume that each adjacency list is ordered
alphabetically . Show the discovery and finish times for each vertex, and
show the classification of each edge.
Page number: 678
20.3-3
Show the parenthesis structure of the depth-first search of Figure 20.4 .
20.3-4
Show that using a single bit to store each vertex color suf fices by ar guing
that the DFS procedure produces the same result if line 10 of DFS-V ISIT  is
removed.
20.3-5
Show that in a directed graph, edge ( u , v ) is
a.  a tree edge or forward edge if and only if u.d  < v .d  < v .f  < u.f ,
b.  a back edge if and only if v .d  ≤ u.d  < u.f  ≤ v .f , and
c.  a cross edge if and only if v .d  < v .f  < u.d  < u.f .
20.3-6
Rewrite the procedure DFS, using a stack to eliminate recursion.
20.3-7
Give a counterexample to the conjecture that if a directed graph G  contains
a path from u  to v , and if u.d  < v .d  in a depth-first search of G , then v  is a
descendant of u  in the depth-first forest produced.
20.3-8
Give a counterexample to the conjecture that if a directed graph G  contains
a path from u  to v , then any depth-first search must result in v .d  ≤ u.f .
20.3-9
Modify the pseudocode for depth-first search so that it prints out every edge
in the directed graph G , together with its type. Show what modifications, if
any , you need to make if G  is undirected.
20.3-10
Explain how a vertex u  of a directed graph can end up in a depth-first tree
containing only u , even though u  has both incoming and outgoing edges in
G .
20.3-1 1
Page number: 679
Let G  = ( V , E ) be a connected, undirected graph. Give an O ( V  + E )-time
algorithm to compute a path in G  that traverses each edge in E  exactly once
in each direction. Describe how you can find your way out of a maze if you
are given a lar ge supply of pennies.
20.3-12
Show how to use a depth-first search of an undirected graph G  to identify
the connected components of G , so that the depth-first forest contains as
many trees as G  has connected components. More precisely , show how to
modify depth-first search so that it assigns to each vertex v  an integer label
v .cc  between 1 and k , where k  is the number of connected components of G ,
such that u.cc  = v .cc  if and only if u  and v  belong to the same connected
component.
★  20.3-13
A directed graph G  = ( V , E ) is singly connected  if u  ⇝  v  implies that G
contains at most one simple path from u  to v  for all vertices u , v  ∈  V . Give
an ef ficient algorithm to determine whether a directed graph is singly
connected.
20.4    T opological sort
This section shows how to use depth-first search to perform a topological
sort of a directed acyclic graph, or a “dag” as it is sometimes called. A
topological sort  of a dag G  = ( V , E ) is a linear ordering of all its vertices
such that if G  contains an edge ( u , v ), then u  appears before v  in the
ordering. T opological sorting is defined only on directed graphs that are
acyclic; no linear ordering is possible when a directed graph contains a
cycle. Think of a topological sort of a graph as an ordering of its vertices
along a horizontal line so that all directed edges go from left to right.
T opological sorting is thus dif ferent from the usual kind of “sorting” studied
in Part II .
Many applications use directed acyclic graphs to indicate precedences
among events. Figure 20.7  gives an example that arises when Professor
Bumstead gets dressed in the morning. The professor must don certain
garments before others (e.g., socks before shoes). Other items may be put
on in any order (e.g., socks and pants). A directed edge ( u , v ) in the dag of
Page number: 680
Figure 20.7(a)  indicates that garment u  must be donned before garment v . A
topological sort of this dag therefore gives a possible order for getting
dressed. Figure 20.7(b)  shows the topologically sorted dag as an ordering of
vertices along a horizontal line such that all directed edges go from left to
right.
The procedure T OPOLOGICAL -S OR T  topologically sorts a dag. Figure
20.7(b)  shows how the topologically sorted vertices appear in reverse order
of their finish times.
T OPOLOGICAL -S OR T ( G )
1 call DFS( G ) to compute finish times v .f  for each vertex v
2 as each vertex is finished, insert it onto the front of a linked list
3 r eturn  the linked list of vertices
The T OPOLOGICAL -S OR T  procedure runs in Θ( V  + E ) time, since depth-
first search takes Θ( V  + E ) time and it takes O (1) time to insert each of the
| V | vertices onto the front of the linked list.
T o prove the correctness of this remarkably simple and ef ficient
algorithm, we start with the following key lemma characterizing directed
acyclic graphs.
Lemma 20.1 1
A directed graph G  is acyclic if and only if a depth-first search of G  yields
no back edges.
Page number: 681
Figur e 20.7 (a)  Professor Bumstead topologically sorts his clothing when getting dressed. Each
directed edge ( u , v ) means that garment u  must be put on before garment v . The discovery and finish
times from a depth-first search are shown next to each vertex. (b)  The same graph shown
topologically sorted, with its vertices arranged from left to right in order of decreasing finish time.
All directed edges go from left to right.
Proof    ⇒ : Suppose that a depth-first search produces a back edge ( u , v ).
Then vertex v  is an ancestor of vertex u  in the depth-first forest. Thus, G
contains a path from v  to u , and the back edge ( u , v ) completes a cycle.
⇐ : Suppose that G  contains a cycle c . W e show that a depth-first search
of G  yields a back edge. Let v  be the first vertex to be discovered in c , and
let ( u , v ) be the preceding edge in c . At time v .d , the vertices of c form a
path of white vertices from v  to u . By the white-path theorem, vertex u
becomes a descendant of v  in the depth-first forest. Therefore, ( u , v ) is a
back edge.
▪
Theorem 20.12
T OPOLOGICAL -S OR T  produces a topological sort of the directed acyclic graph
provided as its input.
Proof    Suppose that DFS is run on a given dag G  = ( V , E ) to determine
finish times for its vertices. It suf fices to show that for any pair of distinct
vertices u , v  ∈  V , if G  contains an edge from u  to v , then v .f  < u.f . Consider
any edge ( u , v ) explored by DFS( G ). When this edge is explored, v  cannot
be gray , since then v  would be an ancestor of u  and ( u , v ) would be a back
Page number: 682
edge, contradicting Lemma 20.1 1. Therefore, v  must be either white or
black. If v  is white, it becomes a descendant of u , and so v .f  < u.f . If v  is
black, it has already been finished, so that v .f  has already been set. Because
the search is still exploring from u , it has yet to assign a timestamp to u.f , so
that the timestamp eventually assigned to u.f  is greater than v .f . Thus, v .f  <
u.f  for any edge ( u , v ) in the dag, proving the theorem.
▪
Figur e 20.8  A dag for topological sorting.
Exer cises
20.4-1
Show the ordering of vertices produced by T OPOLOGICAL -S OR T  when it is
run on the dag of Figure 20.8 . Assume that the for  loop of lines 5–7 of the
DFS procedure considers the vertices in alphabetical order , and assume that
each adjacency list is ordered alphabetically .
20.4-2
Give a linear -time algorithm that, given a directed acyclic graph G  = ( V , E )
and two vertices a , b  ∈  V , returns the number of simple paths from a  to b  in
G . For example, the directed acyclic graph of Figure 20.8  contains exactly
four simple paths from vertex p  to vertex v : 〈 p , o , v〉 , 〈 p , o , r , y , v〉 , 〈 p , o , s ,
r , y , v〉 , and 〈 p , s , r , y , v〉 . Y our algorithm needs only to count the simple
paths, not list them.
20.4-3
Give an algorithm that determines whether an undirected graph G  = ( V , E )
contains a simple cycle. Y our algorithm should run in O ( V ) time,
independent of | E |.
Page number: 683
20.4-4
Prove or disprove: If a directed graph G  contains cycles, then the vertex
ordering produced by T OPOLOGICAL -S OR T ( G ) minimizes the number of
“bad” edges that are inconsistent with the ordering produced.
20.4-5
Another way to topologically sort a directed acyclic graph G  = ( V , E ) is to
repeatedly find a vertex of in-degree 0, output it, and remove it and all of its
outgoing edges from the graph. Explain how to implement this idea so that
it runs in time O ( V  + E ). What happens to this algorithm if G  has cycles?
20.5    Str ongly connected components
W e now consider a classic application of depth-first search: decomposing a
directed graph into its strongly connected components. This section shows
how to do so using two depth-first searches. Many algorithms that work
with directed graphs begin with such a decomposition. After decomposing
the graph into strongly connected components, such algorithms run
separately on each one and then combine the solutions according to the
structure of connections among components.
Recall from Appendix B  that a strongly connected component of a
directed graph G  = ( V , E ) is a maximal set of vertices C  ⊆  V  such that for
every pair of vertices u , v  ∈  C , both u  ⇝  v  and v  ⇝  u , that is, vertices u  and
v  are reachable from each other . Figure 20.9  shows an example.
The algorithm for finding the strongly connected components of a
directed graph G  = ( V , E ) uses the transpose of G , which we defined in
Exercise 20.1-3 to be the graph GT = ( V , ET), where ET = {( u , v ) : ( v , u ) ∈
E }. That is, ET consists of the edges of G  with their directions reversed.
Given an adjacency-list representation of G , the time to create GT is Θ( V  +
E ). The graphs G  and GT have exactly the same strongly connected
components: u  and v  are reachable from each other in G  if and only if they
are reachable from each other in GT. Figure 20.9(b)  shows the transpose of
the graph in Figure 20.9(a) , with the strongly connected components shaded
blue in both parts.
The linear -time (i.e., Θ( V  + E )-time) procedure S TRONGL Y -C ONNECTED -
C OMPONENTS  on the next page computes the strongly connected
Page number: 684
components of a directed graph G  = ( V , E ) using two depth-first searches,
one on G  and one on GT.
The idea behind this algorithm comes from a key property of the
component graph  GSCC = ( VSCC, ESCC), defined as follows. Suppose that G
has strongly connected components C1 , C2 , … , Ck . The vertex set VSCC is
{ v1 , v2 , … , vk }, and it contains one vertex vi  for each strongly connected
component Ci  of G . There is an edge ( vi , vj ) ∈  ESCC if G  contains a directed
edge ( x , y ) for some x  ∈  Ci  and some y  ∈  Cj . Looked at another way , if we
contract all edges whose incident vertices are within the same strongly
connected component of G  so that only a single vertex remains, the
resulting graph is GSCC. Figure 20.9(c)  shows the component graph of the
graph in Figure 20.9(a) .
Figur e 20.9 (a)  A directed graph G . Each region shaded light blue is a strongly connected component
of G . Each vertex is labeled with its discovery and finish times in a depth-first search, and tree edges
are dark blue. (b)  The graph GT, the transpose of G , with the depth-first forest computed in line 3 of
S TRONGL Y -C ONNECTED -C OMPONENTS  shown and tree edges shaded dark blue. Each strongly
connected component corresponds to one depth-first tree. Orange vertices b , c , g , and h  are the roots
of the depth-first trees produced by the depth-first search of GT. (c)  The acyclic component graph
GSCC obtained by contracting all edges within each strongly connected component of G  so that only
a single vertex remains in each component.
S TRONGL Y -C ONNECTED -C OMPONENTS ( G )
1 call DFS( G ) to compute finish times u.f  for each vertex u
2create GT
Page number: 685
3call DFS( GT), but in the main loop of DFS, consider the vertices in order of decreasing u.f  (as
computed in line 1)
4 output the vertices of each tree in the depth-first forest formed in line 3 as a separate strongly
connected component
The following lemma gives the key property that the component graph is
acyclic. W e’ll see that the algorithm uses this property to visit the vertices
of the component graph in topologically sorted order , by considering
vertices in the second depth-first search in decreasing order of the finish
times that were computed in the first depth-first search.
Lemma 20.13
Let C  and C ′ be distinct strongly connected components in directed graph G
= ( V , E ), let u , v  ∈  C , let u ′, v ′ ∈  C ′, and suppose that G  contains a path u
⇝  u ′. Then G  cannot also contain a path v ′ ⇝  v .
Proof    If G  contains a path v ′ ⇝  v , then it contains paths u  ⇝  u ′ ⇝  v ′ and v ′
⇝  v  ⇝  u . Thus, u  and v ′ are reachable from each other , thereby
contradicting the assumption that C  and C ′ are distinct strongly connected
components.
▪
Because the S TRONGL Y -C ONNECTED -C OMPONENTS  procedure performs
two depth-first searches, there are two distinct sets of discovery and finish
times. In this section, discovery and finish times always refer to those
computed by the first  call of DFS, in line 1.
The notation for discovery and finish times extends to sets of vertices.
For a subset U  of vertices, d ( U ) and f ( U ) are the earliest discovery time and
latest finish time, respectively , of any vertex in U : d ( U ) = min { u.d  : u  ∈
U } and f ( U ) = max { u.f  : u  ∈  U }.
The following lemma and its corollary give a key property relating
strongly connected components and finish times in the first depth-first
search.
Lemma 20.14
Let C  and C ′ be distinct strongly connected components in directed graph G
= ( V , E ). Suppose that there is an edge ( u , v ) ∈  E , where u  ∈  C ′ and v  ∈  C .
Then f ( C ′) > f ( C ).
Page number: 686
Proof    W e consider two cases, depending on which strongly connected
component, C  or C ′, had the first discovered vertex during the first depth-
first search.
If d ( C ′) < d ( C ), let x be the first vertex discovered in C ′. At time x.d , all
vertices in C  and C ′ are white. At that time, G  contains a path from x  to
each vertex in C ′ consisting only of white vertices. Because ( u , v ) ∈  E , for
any vertex w  ∈  C , there is also a path in G  at time x.d  from x  to w
consisting only of white vertices: x  ⇝  u  → v  ⇝  w . By the white-path
theorem, all vertices in C  and C ′ become descendants of x  in the depth-first
tree. By Corollary 20.8, x  has the latest finish time of any of its
descendants, and so x.f  = f ( C ′) > f ( C ).
Otherwise, d ( C ′) > d ( C ). Let y be the first vertex discovered in C , so that
y .d  = d ( C ). At time y .d , all vertices in C  are white and G  contains a path
from y  to each vertex in C  consisting only of white vertices. By the white-
path theorem, all vertices in C  become descendants of y  in the depth-first
tree, and by Corollary 20.8, y .f  = f ( C ). Because d ( C ′) > d ( C ) = y .d , all
vertices in C ′ are white at time y .d . Since there is an edge ( u , v ) from C ′ to
C , Lemma 20.13 implies that there cannot be a path from C  to C ′. Hence, no
vertex in C ′ is reachable from y . At time y .f , therefore, all vertices in C ′ are
still white. Thus, for any vertex w  ∈  C ′, we have w .f  > y .f , which implies
that f ( C ′) > f ( C ).
▪
Corollary 20.15
Let C  and C ′ be distinct strongly connected components in directed graph G
= ( V , E ), and suppose that f ( C ) > f ( C ′). Then ET contains no edge ( v , u ) such
that u  = C ′ and v  ∈  C .
Proof    The contrapositive of Lemma 20.14 says that if f ( C ′) < f ( C ), then
there is no edge ( u , v ) ∈  E  such that u  ∈  C ′ and v  ∈  C . Because the
strongly connected components of G  and GT are the same, if there is no
such edge ( u , v ) ∈  E , then there is no edge ( v , u ) ∈  ET such that u  ∈  C ′ and
v  ∈  C .
▪
Corollary 20.15 provides the key to understanding why the strongly
connected components algorithm works. Let’ s examine what happens
during the second depth-first search, which is on GT. The search starts from
Page number: 687
the vertex x  whose finish time from the first depth-first search is maximum.
This vertex belongs to some strongly connected component C , and since x.f
is maximum, f ( C ) is maximum over all strongly connected components.
When the search starts from x , it visits all vertices in C . By Corollary 20.15,
GT contains no edges from C  to any other strongly connected component,
and so the search from x  never visits vertices in any other component. Thus,
the tree rooted at x  contains exactly the vertices of C . Having completed
visiting all vertices in C , the second depth-first search selects as a new root
a vertex from some other strongly connected component C ′ whose finish
time f ( C ′) is maximum over all components other than C . Again, the search
visits all vertices in C ′. But by Corollary 20.15, if any edges in GT go from
C ′ to any other component, they must go to C , which the second depth-first
search has already visited. In general, when the depth-first search of GT in
line 3 visits any strongly connected component, any edges out of that
component must be to components that the search has already visited. Each
depth-first tree, therefore, corresponds to exactly one strongly connected
component. The following theorem formalizes this ar gument.
Theorem 20.16
The S TRONGL Y -C ONNECTED -C OMPONENTS  procedure correctly computes the
strongly connected components of the directed graph G  provided as its
input.
Proof    W e ar gue by induction on the number of depth-first trees found in
the depth-first search of GT in line 3 that the vertices of each tree form a
strongly connected component. The inductive hypothesis is that the first k
trees produced in line 3 are strongly connected components. The basis for
the induction, when k  = 0, is trivial.
In the inductive step, we assume that each of the first k  depth-first trees
produced in line 3 is a strongly connected component, and we consider the
( k  + 1)st tree produced. Let the root of this tree be vertex u , and let u  be in
strongly connected component C . Because of how the depth-first search
chooses roots in line 3, u.f  = f ( C ) > f ( C ′) for any strongly connected
component C ′ other than C  that has yet to be visited. By the inductive
hypothesis, at the time that the search visits u , all other vertices of C  are
white. By the white-path theorem, therefore, all other vertices of C  are
descendants of u  in its depth-first tree. Moreover , by the inductive
Page number: 688
hypothesis and by Corollary 20.15, any edges in GT that leave C  must be to
strongly connected components that have already been visited. Thus, no
vertex in any strongly connected component other than C  is a descendant of
u  during the depth-first search of GT. The vertices of the depth-first tree in
GT that is rooted at u  form exactly one strongly connected component,
which completes the inductive step and the proof.
▪
Here is another way to look at how the second depth-first search
operates. Consider the component graph ( GT)SCC of GT. If you map each
strongly connected component visited in the second depth-first search to a
vertex of ( GT)SCC, the second depth-first search visits vertices of ( GT)SCC in
the reverse of a topologically sorted order . If you reverse the edges of
( GT)SCC, you get the graph (( GT)SCC)T. Because (( GT)SCC)T = GSCC (see
Exercise 20.5-4), the second depth-first search visits the vertices of GSCC in
topologically sorted order .
Exer cises
20.5-1
How can the number of strongly connected components of a graph change
if a new edge is added?
20.5-2
Show how the procedure S TRONGL Y -C ONNECTED -C OMPONENTS  works on the
graph of Figure 20.6 . Specifically , show the finish times computed in line 1
and the forest produced in line 3. Assume that the loop of lines 5–7 of DFS
considers vertices in alphabetical order and that the adjacency lists are in
alphabetical order .
20.5-3
Professor Bacon rewrites the algorithm for strongly connected components
to use the original (instead of the transpose) graph in the second depth-first
search and scan the vertices in order of incr easing  finish times. Does this
modified algorithm always produce correct results?
20.5-4
Page number: 689
Prove that for any directed graph G , the transpose of the component graph
of GT is the same as the component graph of G . That is, (( GT)SCC)T = GSCC.
20.5-5
Give an O ( V  + E )-time algorithm to compute the component graph of a
directed graph G  = ( V , E ). Make sure that there is at most one edge between
two vertices in the component graph your algorithm produces.
20.5-6
Give an O ( V  + E )-time algorithm that, given a directed graph G  = ( V , E ),
constructs another graph G ′ = ( V , E ′) such that G  and G ′ have the same
strongly connected components, G ′ has the same component graph as G ,
and | E ′| is as small as possible.
20.5-7
A directed graph G  = ( V , E ) is semiconnected  if, for all pairs of vertices u , v
∈  V , we have u  ⇝  v  or v  ⇝  u . Give an ef ficient algorithm to determine
whether G  is semiconnected. Prove that your algorithm is correct, and
analyze its running time.
20.5-8
Let G  = ( V , E ) be a directed graph, and let l  : V  → ℝ  be a function that
assigns a real-valued label l  to each vertex. For vertices s , t  ∈  V , define
Give an O ( V  + E )-time algorithm to find vertices s  and t  such that Δ l ( s , t ) is
maximum over all pairs of vertices. ( Hint:  Use Exercise 20.5-5.)
Pr oblems
20-1     Classifying edges by breadth-first search
A depth-first forest classifies the edges of a graph into tree, back, forward,
and cross edges. A breadth-first tree can also be used to classify the edges
reachable from the source of the search into the same four categories.
Page number: 690
Figur e 20.10  The articulation points, bridges, and biconnected components of a connected,
undirected graph for use in Problem 20-2. The articulation points are the orange vertices, the bridges
are the dark blue edges, and the biconnected components are the edges in the light blue regions, with
a bcc  numbering shown.
a.  Prove that in a breadth-first search of an undirected graph, the following
properties hold:
1. There are no back edges and no forward edges.
2. If ( u , v ) is a tree edge, then v .d  = u.d  + 1.
3. If ( u , v ) is a cross edge, then v .d  = u.d  or v .d  = u.d  + 1.
b.  Prove that in a breadth-first search of a directed graph, the following
properties hold:
1. There are no forward edges.
2. If ( u , v ) is a tree edge, then v .d  = u.d  + 1.
3. If ( u , v ) is a cross edge, then v .d  ≤ u.d  + 1.
4. If ( u , v ) is a back edge, then 0 ≤ v .d  ≤ u.d .
20-2     Articulation points, bridges, and biconnected components
Let G  = ( V , E ) be a connected, undirected graph. An articulation point  of G
is a vertex whose removal disconnects G . A bridge  of G  is an edge whose
removal disconnects G . A biconnected component  of G  is a maximal set of
edges such that any two edges in the set lie on a common simple cycle.
Figure 20.10  illustrates these definitions. Y ou can determine articulation
points, bridges, and biconnected components using depth-first search. Let
Gπ  = ( V , Eπ ) be a depth-first tree of G .
a.  Prove that the root of Gπ  is an articulation point of G  if and only if it has
at least two children in Gπ .
Page number: 691
b.  Let v  be a nonroot vertex of Gπ . Prove that v  is an articulation point of G
if and only if v  has a child s  such that there is no back edge from s  or any
descendant of s  to a proper ancestor of v .
c.  Let
Show how to compute v .low  for all vertices v  ∈  V  in O ( E ) time.
d.  Show how to compute all articulation points in O ( E ) time.
e.  Prove that an edge of G  is a bridge if and only if it does not lie on any
simple cycle of G .
f.  Show how to compute all the bridges of G  in O ( E ) time.
g.  Prove that the biconnected components of G  partition the nonbridge
edges of G .
h.  Give an O ( E )-time algorithm to label each edge e  of G  with a positive
integer e.bcc  such that e . bcc  = e ′. bcc  if and only if e  and e ′ belong to the
same biconnected component.
20-3     Euler tour
An Euler tour  of a strongly connected, directed graph G  = ( V , E ) is a cycle
that traverses each edge of G  exactly once, although it may visit a vertex
more than once.
a.  Show that G  has an Euler tour if and only if in-degree( v ) = out-degree( v )
for each vertex v  ∈  V .
b.  Describe an O ( E )-time algorithm to find an Euler tour of G  if one exists.
( Hint:  Mer ge edge-disjoint cycles.)
20-4     Reachability
Let G  = ( V , E ) be a directed graph in which each vertex u  ∈  V  is labeled
with a unique integer L ( u ) from the set {1, 2, … , | V |}. For each vertex u  ∈
V , let R ( u ) = { v  ∈  V  : u  ⇝  v } be the set of vertices that are reachable from
u . Define min( u ) to be the vertex in R ( u ) whose label is minimum, that is,
Page number: 692
min( u ) is the vertex v  such that L ( v ) = min { L ( w ) : w  ∈  R ( u )}. Give an O ( V
+ E )-time algorithm that computes min( u ) for all vertices u  ∈  V .
20-5 Inserting and querying vertices in planar graphs
A planar  graph is an undirected graph that can be drawn in the plane with
no edges crossing. Euler proved that every planar graph has | E | < 3 | V |.
Consider the following two operations on a planar graph G :
I NSER T ( G , v , neighbors ) inserts a new vertex v  into G , where
neighbors  is an array (possibly empty) of vertices that have already
been inserted into G  and will become all the neighbors of v  in G
when v  is inserted.
N EWEST -N EIGHBOR ( G , v ) returns the neighbor of vertex v  that was
most recently inserted into G , or NIL  if v  has no neighbors.
Design a data structure that supports these two operations such that
N EWEST -N EIGHBOR  takes O (1) worst-case time and I NSER T  takes O (1)
amortized time. Note that the length of the array neighbors  given to I NSER T
may vary . ( Hint:  Use a potential function for the amortized analysis.)
Chapter notes
Even [ 137 ] and T arjan [ 429 ] are excellent references for graph algorithms.
Breadth-first search was discovered by Moore [ 334 ] in the context of
finding paths through mazes. Lee [ 280 ] independently discovered the same
algorithm in the context of routing wires on circuit boards.
Hopcroft and T arjan [ 226 ] advocated the use of the adjacency-list
representation over the adjacency-matrix representation for sparse graphs
and were the first to recognize the algorithmic importance of depth-first
search. Depth-first search has been widely used since the late 1950s,
especially in artificial intelligence programs.
T arjan [ 426 ] gave a linear -time algorithm for finding strongly connected
components. The algorithm for strongly connected components in Section
20.5  is adapted from Aho, Hopcroft, and Ullman [ 6 ], who credit it to S. R.
Kosaraju (unpublished) and Sharir [ 408 ]. Dijkstra [ 1 17 , Chapter 25 ] also
developed an algorithm for strongly connected components that is based on
contracting cycles. Subsequently , Gabow [ 163 ] rediscovered this algorithm.
Page number: 693
Knuth [ 259 ] was the first to give a linear -time algorithm for topological
sorting.
1 W e distinguish between gray and black vertices to help us understand how breadth-first search
operates. In fact, as Exercise 20.2-3 shows, we get the same result even if we do not distinguish
between gray and black vertices.
2 Chapters 22  and 23  generalize shortest paths to weighted graphs, in which every edge has a real-
valued weight and the weight of a path is the sum of the weights of its constituent edges. The graphs
considered in the present chapter are unweighted or , equivalently , all edges have unit weight.
3 It may seem arbitrary that breadth-first search is limited to only one source whereas depth-first
search may search from multiple sources. Although conceptually , breadth-first search could proceed
from multiple sources and depth-first search could be limited to one source, our approach reflects
how the results of these searches are typically used. Breadth-first search usually serves to find
shortest-path distances and the associated predecessor subgraph from a given source. Depth-first
search is often a subroutine in another algorithm, as we’ll see later in this chapter .
Page number: 694
21        Minimum Spanning T r ees
Electronic circuit designs often need to make the pins of several
components electrically equivalent by wiring them together . T o interconnect
a set of n  pins, the designer can use an arrangement of n  − 1 wires, each
connecting two pins. Of all such arrangements, the one that uses the least
amount of wire is usually the most desirable.
T o model this wiring problem, use a connected, undirected graph G  =
( V , E ), where V  is the set of pins, E  is the set of possible interconnections
between pairs of pins, and for each edge ( u , v ) ∈  E , a weight w ( u , v )
specifies the cost (amount of wire needed) to connect u  and v . The goal is to
find an acyclic subset T  ⊆  E  that connects all of the vertices and whose
total weight
is minimized. Since T  is acyclic and connects all of the vertices, it must
form a tree, which we call a spanning tree  since it “spans” the graph G . W e
call the problem of determining the tree T  the minimum-spanning-tree
problem .1 Figure 21.1  shows an example of a connected graph and a
minimum spanning tree.
This chapter studies two ways to solve the minimum-spanning-tree
problem. Kruskal’ s algorithm and Prim’ s algorithm both run in O ( E  lg V )
time. Prim’ s algorithm achieves this bound by using a binary heap as a
priority queue. By using Fibonacci heaps instead (see page 478), Prim’ s
algorithm runs in O ( E  + V  lg V ) time. This bound is better than O ( E  lg V )
whenever | E | grows asymptotically faster than | V |.
Page number: 695
Figur e 21.1  A minimum spanning tree for a connected graph. The weights on edges are shown, and
the blue edges form a minimum spanning tree. The total weight of the tree shown is 37. This
minimum spanning tree is not unique: removing the edge ( b , c ) and replacing it with the edge ( a , h )
yields another spanning tree with weight 37.
The two algorithms are greedy algorithms, as described in Chapter 15 .
Each step of a greedy algorithm must make one of several possible choices.
The greedy strategy advocates making the choice that is the best at the
moment. Such a strategy does not generally guarantee that it always finds
globally optimal solutions to problems. For the minimum-spanning-tree
problem, however , we can prove that certain greedy strategies do yield a
spanning tree with minimum weight. Although you can read this chapter
independently of Chapter 15 , the greedy methods presented here are a
classic application of the theoretical notions introduced there.
Section 21.1  introduces a “generic” minimum-spanning-tree method that
grows a spanning tree by adding one edge at a time. Section 21.2  gives two
algorithms that implement the generic method. The first algorithm, due to
Kruskal, is similar to the connected-components algorithm from Section
19.1 . The second, due to Prim, resembles Dijkstra’ s shortest-paths
algorithm ( Section 22.3 ).
Because a tree is a type of graph, in order to be precise we must define a
tree in terms of not just its edges, but its vertices as well. Because this
chapter focuses on trees in terms of their edges, we’ll implicitly understand
that the vertices of a tree T  are those that some edge of T  is incident on.
21.1    Gr owing a minimum spanning tr ee
The input to the minumum-spanning-tree problem is a connected,
undirected graph G  = ( V , E ) with a weight function w  : E  → ℝ . The goal is
to find a minimum spanning tree for G . The two algorithms considered in
this chapter use a greedy approach to the problem, although they dif fer in
how they apply this approach.
Page number: 696
This greedy strategy is captured by the procedure G ENERIC -MST on the
facing page, which grows the minimum spanning tree one edge at a time.
The generic method manages a set A of edges, maintaining the following
loop invariant:
Prior to each iteration, A  is a subset of some minimum spanning
tree.
G ENERIC -MST( G , w )
1 A  = Ø
2 while  A does not form a spanning tree
3 find an edge ( u , v ) that is safe for A
4 A  = A  ∪  {( u , v )}
5 r eturn  A
Each step determines an edge ( u , v ) that the procedure can add to A
without violating this invariant, in the sense that A  ∪  {( u , v )} is also a
subset of a minimum spanning tree. W e call such an edge a safe edge  for A ,
since it can be added safely to A  while maintaining the invariant.
This generic algorithm uses the loop invariant as follows:
Initialization:  After line 1, the set A  trivially satisfies the loop invariant.
Maintenance:  The loop in lines 2–4 maintains the invariant by adding only
safe edges.
T ermination:  All edges added to A  belong to a minimum spanning tree,
and the loop must terminate by the time it has considered all edges.
Therefore, the set A  returned in line 5 must be a minimum spanning tree.
The tricky part is, of course, finding a safe edge in line 3. One must
exist, since when line 3 is executed, the invariant dictates that there is a
spanning tree T  such that A  ⊆  T . W ithin the while  loop body , A  must be a
proper subset of T , and therefore there must be an edge ( u , v ) ∈  T  such that
( u , v ) ∉  A  and ( u , v ) is safe for A .
The remainder of this section provides a rule (Theorem 21.1) for
recognizing safe edges. The next section describes two algorithms that use
this rule to find safe edges ef ficiently .
W e first need some definitions. A cut  (S, V  – S) of an undirected graph G
= ( V , E ) is a partition of V . Figure 21.2  illustrates this notion. W e say that an
Page number: 697
edge ( u , v ) ∈  E crosses  the cut ( S , V  – S ) if one of its endpoints belongs to S
and the other belongs to V  – S . A cut respects  a set A  of edges if no edge in
A  crosses the cut. An edge is a light edge  crossing a cut if its weight is the
minimum of any edge crossing the cut. There can be more than one light
edge crossing a cut in the case of ties. More generally , we say that an edge
is a light edge  satisfying a given property if its weight is the minimum of
any edge satisfying the property .
The following theorem gives the rule for recognizing safe edges.
Theorem 21.1
Let G  = ( V , E ) be a connected, undirected graph with a real-valued weight
function w  defined on E . Let A  be a subset of E  that is included in some
minimum spanning tree for G , let ( S , V  – S ) be any cut of G  that respects A ,
and let ( u , v ) be a light edge crossing ( S , V  – S ). Then, edge ( u , v ) is safe for
A .
Figur e 21.2  A  cut ( S , V  – S ) of the graph from Figure 21.1 . Orange vertices belong to the set S , and
tan vertices belong to V  – S . The edges crossing the cut are those connecting tan vertices with orange
vertices. The edge ( d , c ) is the unique light edge crossing the cut. Blue edges form a subset A  of the
edges. The cut ( S , V  – S ) respects A , since no edge of A  crosses the cut.
Proof    Let T  be a minimum spanning tree that includes A , and assume that
T  does not contain the light edge ( u , v ), since if it does, we are done. W e’ll
construct another minimum spanning tree T ′ that includes A  ∪  {( u , v )} by
using a cut-and-paste technique, thereby showing that ( u , v ) is a safe edge
for A .
The edge ( u , v ) forms a cycle with the edges on the simple path p from u
to v  in T , as Figure 21.3  illustrates. Since u  and v  are on opposite sides of
the cut ( S , V  – S ), at least one edge in T  lies on the simple path p  and also
crosses the cut. Let ( x , y ) be any such edge. The edge ( x , y ) is not in A ,
because the cut respects A . Since ( x , y ) is on the unique simple path from u
Page number: 698
to v  in T , removing ( x , y ) breaks T  into two components. Adding ( u , v )
reconnects them to form a new spanning tree T ′ = ( T  – {( x , y )}) ∪  {( u , v )}.
W e next show that T ′ is a minimum spanning tree. Since ( u , v ) is a light
edge crossing ( S , V  – S ) and ( x , y ) also crosses this cut, w ( u , v ) ≤ w ( x , y ).
Therefore,
w ( T ′) = w ( T ) − w ( x , y ) + w ( u , v )
≤ w ( T ).
But T  is a minimum spanning tree, so that w ( T ) ≤ w ( T ′), and thus, T ′ must
be a minimum spanning tree as well.
It remains to show that ( u , v ) is actually a safe edge for A . W e have A  ⊆
T ′, since A  ⊆  T  and ( x , y ) ∉  A , and thus, A  ∪  {( u , v )} ⊆  T ′. Consequently ,
since T ′ is a minimum spanning tree, ( u , v ) is safe for A .
▪
Theorem 21.1 provides insight into how the G ENERIC -MST method
works on a connected graph G  = ( V , E ). As the method proceeds, the set A
is always acyclic, since it is a subset of a minimum spanning tree and a tree
may not contain a cycle. At any point in the execution, the graph GA  = ( V ,
A ) is a forest, and each of the connected components of GA  is a tree. (Some
of the trees may contain just one vertex, as is the case, for example, when
the method begins: A  is empty and the forest contains | V | trees, one for each
vertex.) Moreover , any safe edge ( u , v ) for A  connects distinct components
of GA , since A  ∪  {( u , v )} must be acyclic.
Page number: 699
Figur e 21.3  The proof of Theorem 21.1. Orange vertices belong to S , and tan vertices belong to V  –
S . Only edges in the minimum spanning tree T  are shown, along with edge ( u , v ), which does not lie
in T . The edges in A  are blue, and ( u , v ) is a light edge crossing the cut ( S , V  – S ). The edge ( x , y ) is
an edge on the unique simple path p  from u  to v  in T . T o form a minimum spanning tree T ′ that
contains ( u , v ), remove the edge ( x , y ) from T  and add the edge ( u , v ).
The while  loop in lines 2–4 of G ENERIC -MST executes | V | – 1 times
because it finds one of the | V | – 1 edges of a minimum spanning tree in each
iteration. Initially , when A  = Ø, there are | V | trees in GA , and each iteration
reduces that number by 1. When the forest contains only a single tree, the
method terminates.
The two algorithms in Section 21.2  use the following corollary to
Theorem 21.1.
Corollary 21.2
Let G  = ( V , E ) be a connected, undirected graph with a real-valued weight
function w  defined on E . Let A  be a subset of E  that is included in some
minimum spanning tree for G , and let C  = ( VC , EC ) be a connected
component (tree) in the forest GA  = ( V , A ). If ( u , v ) is a light edge
connecting C  to some other component in GA , then ( u , v ) is safe for A .
Proof    The cut ( VC , V  – VC ) respects A , and ( u , v ) is a light edge for this
cut. Therefore, ( u , v ) is safe for A .
▪
Exer cises
21.1-1
Page number: 700
Let ( u , v ) be a minimum-weight edge in a connected graph G . Show that ( u ,
v ) belongs to some minimum spanning tree of G .
21.1-2
Professor Sabatier conjectures the following converse of Theorem 21.1. Let
G  = ( V , E ) be a connected, undirected graph with a real-valued weight
function w  defined on E . Let A  be a subset of E  that is included in some
minimum spanning tree for G , let ( S , V  – S ) be any cut of G  that respects A ,
and let ( u , v ) be a safe edge for A  crossing ( S , V  – S ). Then, ( u , v ) is a light
edge for the cut. Show that the professor ’ s conjecture is incorrect by giving
a counterexample.
21.1-3
Show that if an edge ( u , v ) is contained in some minimum spanning tree,
then it is a light edge crossing some cut of the graph.
21.1-4
Give a simple example of a connected graph such that the set of edges {( u ,
v ) : there exists a cut ( S , V  – S ) such that ( u , v ) is a light edge crossing ( S , V
– S )} does not form a minimum spanning tree.
21.1-5
Let e  be a maximum-weight edge on some cycle of connected graph G  = ( V ,
E ). Prove that there is a minimum spanning tree of G ′ = ( V , E  – { e }) that is
also a minimum spanning tree of G . That is, there is a minimum spanning
tree of G  that does not include e .
21.1-6
Show that a graph has a unique minimum spanning tree if, for every cut of
the graph, there is a unique light edge crossing the cut. Show that the
converse is not true by giving a counterexample.
21.1-7
Ar gue that if all edge weights of a graph are positive, then any subset of
edges that connects all vertices and has minimum total weight must be a
tree. Give an example to show that the same conclusion does not follow if
we allow some weights to be nonpositive.
21.1-8
Page number: 701
Let T  be a minimum spanning tree of a graph G , and let L  be the sorted list
of the edge weights of T . Show that for any other minimum spanning tree T ′
of G , the list L  is also the sorted list of edge weights of T ′.
21.1-9
Let T  be a minimum spanning tree of a graph G  = ( V , E ), and let V ′ be a
subset of V . Let T ′ be the subgraph of T  induced by V ′, and let G ′ be the
subgraph of G  induced by V ′. Show that if T ′ is connected, then T ′ is a
minimum spanning tree of G′.
21.1-10
Given a graph G  and a minimum spanning tree T , suppose that the weight
of one of the edges in T  decreases. Show that T  is still a minimum spanning
tree for G . More formally , let T  be a minimum spanning tree for G  with
edge weights given by weight function w . Choose one edge ( x , y ) ∈  T  and a
positive number k , and define the weight function w ′ by
Show that T  is a minimum spanning tree for G  with edge weights given by
w ′.
★  21.1-1 1
Given a graph G  and a minimum spanning tree T , suppose that the weight
of one of the edges not  in T  decreases. Give an algorithm for finding the
minimum spanning tree in the modified graph.
21.2    The algorithms of Kruskal and Prim
The two minimum-spanning-tree algorithms described in this section
elaborate on the generic method. They each use a specific rule to determine
a safe edge in line 3 of G ENERIC -MST . In Kruskal’ s algorithm, the set A  is a
forest whose vertices are all those of the given graph. The safe edge added
to A  is always a lowest-weight edge in the graph that connects two distinct
components. In Prim’ s algorithm, the set A  forms a single tree. The safe
edge added to A  is always a lowest-weight edge connecting the tree to a
vertex not in the tree. Both algorithms assume that the input graph is
connected and represented by adjacency lists.
Page number: 702
Figur e 21.4  The execution of Kruskal’ s algorithm on the graph from Figure 21.1 . Blue edges belong
to the forest A  being grown. The algorithm considers each edge in sorted order by weight. A red
arrow points to the edge under consideration at each step of the algorithm. If the edge joins two
distinct trees in the forest, it is added to the forest, thereby mer ging the two trees.
Kruskal’ s algorithm
Kruskal’ s algorithm finds a safe edge to add to the growing forest by
finding, of all the edges that connect any two trees in the forest, an edge ( u ,
v ) with the lowest weight. Let C1  and C2  denote the two trees that are
connected by ( u , v ). Since ( u , v ) must be a light edge connecting C1  to some
other tree, Corollary 21.2 implies that ( u , v ) is a safe edge for C1 . Kruskal’ s
algorithm qualifies as a greedy algorithm because at each step it adds to the
forest an edge with the lowest possible weight.
Page number: 703
Figur e 21.4, continued  Further steps in the execution of Kruskal’ s algorithm.
Like the algorithm to compute connected components from Section
19.1 , the procedure MST -K RUSKAL  on the following page uses a disjoint-set
data structure to maintain several disjoint sets of elements. Each set
contains the vertices in one tree of the current forest. The operation F IND -
S ET ( u ) returns a representative element from the set that contains u . Thus, to
determine whether two vertices u  and v  belong to the same tree, just test
whether F IND -S ET ( u ) equals F IND -S ET ( v ). T o combine trees, Kruskal’ s
algorithm calls the U NION  procedure.
Figure 21.4  shows how Kruskal’ s algorithm works. Lines 1–3 initialize
the set A  to the empty set and create | V | trees, one containing each vertex.
The for  loop in lines 6–9 examines edges in order of weight, from lowest to
highest. The loop checks, for each edge ( u , v ), whether the endpoints u  and
v  belong to the same tree. If they do, then the edge ( u , v ) cannot be added to
the forest without creating a cycle, and the edge is ignored. Otherwise, the
two vertices belong to dif ferent trees. In this case, line 8 adds the edge ( u , v )
to A , and line 9 mer ges the vertices in the two trees.
MST -K RUSKAL ( G , w )
Page number: 704
  1 A  = Ø
  2 for  each vertex v  ∈  G.V
  3 M AKE -S ET ( v )
  4 create a single list of the edges in G.E
  5 sort the list of edges into monotonically increasing order by weight w
  6 for  each edge ( u , v ) taken from the sorted list in order
  7 if  F IND -S ET ( u ) ≠ F IND -S ET ( v )
  8 A  = A  ∪  {( u , v )}
  9 U NION ( u , v )
10 r eturn  A
The running time of Kruskal’ s algorithm for a graph G  = ( V , E ) depends
on the specific implementation of the disjoint-set data structure. Let’ s
assume that it uses the disjoint-set-forest implementation of Section 19.3
with the union-by-rank and path-compression heuristics, since that is the
asymptotically fastest implementation known. Initializing the set A  in line 1
takes O (1) time, creating a single list of edges in line 4 takes O ( V  + E ) time
(which is O (E) because G  is connected), and the time to sort the edges in
line 5 is O ( E  lg E ). (W e’ll account for the cost of the | V | M AKE -S ET
operations in the for  loop of lines 2–3 in a moment.) The for  loop of lines
6–9 performs O ( E ) F IND -S ET  and U NION  operations on the disjoint-set
forest. Along with the | V | M AKE -S ET  operations, these disjoint-set
operations take a total of O (( V  + E ) α( V )) time, where α is the very slowly
growing function defined in Section 19.4 . Because we assume that G  is
connected, we have | E | ≥ | V | – 1, and so the disjoint-set operations take O ( E
α( V )) time. Moreover , since α(| V |) = O (lg V ) = O (lg E ), the total running
time of Kruskal’ s algorithm is O ( E  lg E ). Observing that | E | < | V |2, we have
lg | E | = O (lg V ), and so we can restate the running time of Kruskal’ s
algorithm as O ( E  lg V ).
Prim’ s algorithm
Like Kruskal’ s algorithm, Prim’ s algorithm is a special case of the generic
minimum-spanning-tree method from Section 21.1 . Prim’ s algorithm
operates much like Dijkstra’ s algorithm for finding shortest paths in a
graph, which we’ll see in Section 22.3 . Prim’ s algorithm has the property
that the edges in the set A  always form a single tree. As Figure 21.5  shows,
the tree starts from an arbitrary root vertex r and grows until it spans all the
vertices in V . Each step adds to the tree A a light edge that connects A  to an
isolated vertex—one on which no edge of A  is incident. By Corollary 21.2,
Page number: 705
this rule adds only edges that are safe for A . Therefore, when the algorithm
terminates, the edges in A  form a minimum spanning tree. This strategy
qualifies as greedy since at each step it adds to the tree an edge that
contributes the minimum amount possible to the tree’ s weight.
Figur e 21.5  The execution of Prim’ s algorithm on the graph from Figure 21.1 . The root vertex is a .
Blue vertices and edges belong to the tree being grown, and tan vertices have yet to be added to the
tree. At each step of the algorithm, the vertices in the tree determine a cut of the graph, and a light
edge crossing the cut is added to the tree. The edge and vertex added to the tree are highlighted in
orange. In the second step (part (c)), for example, the algorithm has a choice of adding either edge ( b ,
c ) or edge ( a , h ) to the tree since both are light edges crossing the cut.
In the procedure MST -P RIM  below , the connected graph G  and the root r
of the minimum spanning tree to be grown are inputs to the algorithm. In
Page number: 706
order to ef ficiently select a new edge to add into tree A , the algorithm
maintains a min-priority queue Q  of all vertices that are not  in the tree,
based on a key  attribute. For each vertex v , the attribute v .key  is the
minimum weight of any edge connecting v  to a vertex in the tree, where by
convention, v .key  = ∞ if there is no such edge. The attribute v .π names the
parent of v  in the tree. The algorithm implicitly maintains the set A  from
G ENERIC -MST as
A  = {( v , v .π) : v  ∈  V  – { r } – Q },
where we interpret the vertices in Q  as forming a set. When the algorithm
terminates, the min-priority queue Q  is empty , and thus the minimum
spanning tree A  for G  is
A  = {( v , v .π) : v  ∈  V  – { r }}.
MST -P RIM ( G , w , r )
  1 for  each vertex u  ∈  G . V
  2 u.key  = ∞
  3 u .π = NIL
  4 r .key  = 0
  5 Q  = Ø
  6 for  each vertex u  ∈  G.V
  7 I NSER T ( Q , u )
  8 while  Q  ≠ Ø
  9 u  = E XTRACT -M IN ( Q ) // add u  to the tree
10 for  each vertex v  in G.Adj [ u ] // update keys of u ’ s non-tree neighbors
1 1 if  v  ∈  Q  and w ( u , v ) < v .key
12 v .π = u
13 v .key  = w ( u , v )
14 D ECREASE -K EY ( Q , v , w ( u , v ))
Figure 21.5  shows how Prim’ s algorithm works. Lines 1–7 set the key of
each vertex to ∞ (except for the root r , whose key is set to 0 to make it the
first vertex processed), set the parent of each vertex to NIL , and insert each
vertex into the min-priority queue Q . The algorithm maintains the following
three-part loop invariant:
Prior to each iteration of the while  loop of lines 8–14,
1 . A  = {( v , v .π) : v  ∈  V  – {r} – Q }.
Page number: 707
2 . The vertices already placed into the minimum spanning tree
are those in V  − Q .
3 . For all vertices v  ∈  Q , if v .π ≠ NIL , then v .key  < ∞ and v .key
is the weight of a light edge ( v , v .π) connecting v  to some
vertex already placed into the minimum spanning tree.
Line 9 identifies a vertex u  ∈  Q  incident on a light edge that crosses the cut
( V  – Q , Q ) (with the exception of the first iteration, in which u  = r  due to
lines 4–7). Removing u  from the set Q  adds it to the set V  – Q  of vertices in
the tree, thus adding the edge ( u , u .π) to A . The for  loop of lines 10–14
updates the key  and attributes of every vertex v  adjacent to u  but not in the
tree, thereby maintaining the third part of the loop invariant. Whenever line
13 updates v .key , line 14 calls D ECREASE -K EY  to inform the min-priority
queue that v ’ s key has changed.
The running time of Prim’ s algorithm depends on the specific
implementation of the min-priority queue Q . Y ou can implement Q  with a
binary min-heap (see Chapter 6 ), including a way to map between vertices
and their corresponding heap elements. The B UILD -M IN -H EAP  procedure
can perform lines 5–7 in O ( V ) time. In fact, there is no need to call B UILD -
M IN -H EAP . Y ou can just put the key of r  at the root of the min-heap, and
because all other keys are ∞, they can go anywhere else in the min-heap.
The body of the while  loop executes | V | times, and since each E XTRACT -M IN
operation takes O (lg V ) time, the total time for all calls to E XTRACT -M IN  is
O ( V  lg V ). The for  loop in lines 10–14 executes O ( E ) times altogether ,
since the sum of the lengths of all adjacency lists is 2 | E |. W ithin the for
loop, the test for membership in Q  in line 1 1 can take constant time if you
keep a bit for each vertex that indicates whether it belongs to Q  and update
the bit when the vertex is removed from Q . Each call to D ECREASE -K EY  in
line 14 takes O (lg V ) time. Thus, the total time for Prim’ s algorithm is O ( V
lg V  + E  lg V ) = O ( E  lg V ), which is asymptotically the same as for our
implementation of Kruskal’ s algorithm.
Y ou can further improve the asymptotic running time of Prim’ s
algorithm by implementing the min-priority queue with a Fibonacci heap
(see page 478). If a Fibonacci heap holds | V | elements, an E XTRACT -M IN
operation takes O (lg V ) amortized time and each I NSER T  and D ECREASE -K EY
operation takes only O (1) amortized time. Therefore, by using a Fibonacci
Page number: 708
heap to implement the min-priority queue Q , the running time of Prim’ s
algorithm improves to O ( E + V  lg V ).
Exer cises
21.2-1
Kruskal’ s algorithm can return dif ferent spanning trees for the same input
graph G , depending on how it breaks ties when the edges are sorted. Show
that for each minimum spanning tree T  of G , there is a way to sort the edges
of G  in Kruskal’ s algorithm so that the algorithm returns T .
21.2-2
Give a simple implementation of Prim’ s algorithm that runs in O ( V2) time
when the graph G  = ( V , E ) is represented as an adjacency matrix.
21.2-3
For a sparse graph G  = ( V , E ), where | E | = Θ( V ), is the implementation of
Prim’ s algorithm with a Fibonacci heap asymptotically faster than the
binary-heap implementation? What about for a dense graph, where | E | =
Θ( V2)? How must the sizes | E | and | V | be related for the Fibonacci-heap
implementation to be asymptotically faster than the binary-heap
implementation?
21.2-4
Suppose that all edge weights in a graph are integers in the range from 1 to
| V |. How fast can you make Kruskal’ s algorithm run? What if the edge
weights are integers in the range from 1 to W  for some constant W ?
21.2-5
Suppose that all edge weights in a graph are integers in the range from 1 to
| V |. How fast can you make Prim’ s algorithm run? What if the edge weights
are integers in the range from 1 to W  for some constant W ?
21.2-6
Professor Borden proposes a new divide-and-conquer algorithm for
computing minimum spanning trees, which goes as follows. Given a graph
G  = ( V , E ), partition the set V  of vertices into two sets V1  and V2  such that
| V1 | and | V2 | dif fer by at most 1. Let E1  be the set of edges that are incident
Page number: 709
only on vertices in V1 , and let E2  be the set of edges that are incident only
on vertices in V2 . Recursively solve a minimum-spanning-tree problem on
each of the two subgraphs G1  = ( V1 , E1 ) and G2  = ( V2 , E2 ). Finally , select
the minimum-weight edge in E  that crosses the cut V1 , V2 ), and use this
edge to unite the resulting two minimum spanning trees into a single
spanning tree.
Either ar gue that the algorithm correctly computes a minimum spanning
tree of G , or provide an example for which the algorithm fails.
★  21.2-7
Suppose that the edge weights in a graph are uniformly distributed over the
half-open interval [0, 1). Which algorithm, Kruskal’ s or Prim’ s, can you
make run faster?
★  21.2-8
Suppose that a graph G  has a minimum spanning tree already computed.
How quickly can you update the minimum spanning tree upon adding a
new vertex and incident edges to G ?
Pr oblems
21-1     Second-best minimum spanning tree
Let G  = ( V , E ) be an undirected, connected graph whose weight function is
w  : E  → ℝ , and suppose that | E | ≥ | V | and all edge weights are distinct.
W e define a second-best minimum spanning tree as follows. Let T  be
the set of all spanning trees of G , and let T  be a minimum spanning tree of
G . Then a second-best minimum spanning tree  is a spanning tree T ′ such
that w ( T ′) = min { w ( T ″) : T ″ ∈  T  − { T }}.
a.  Show that the minimum spanning tree is unique, but that the second-best
minimum spanning tree need not be unique.
b.  Let T  be the minimum spanning tree of G . Prove that G  contains some
edge ( u , v ) ∈  T  and some edge ( x , y ) ∉  T  such that ( T  – {( u , v )}) ∪  {( x ,
y )} is a second-best minimum spanning tree of G .
Page number: 710
c.  Now let T  be any spanning tree of G  and, for any two vertices u , v  ∈  V ,
let max [ u , v ] denote an edge of maximum weight on the unique simple
path between u  and v  in T . Describe an O ( V2)-time algorithm that, given
T , computes max [ u , v ] for all u, v  ∈  V .
d.  Give an ef ficient algorithm to compute the second-best minimum
spanning tree of G .
21-2     Minimum spanning tree in sparse graphs
For a very sparse connected graph G  = ( V , E ), it is possible to further
improve upon the O ( E  + V  lg V ) running time of Prim’ s algorithm with a
Fibonacci heap by preprocessing G  to decrease the number of vertices
before running Prim’ s algorithm. In particular , for each vertex u , choose the
minimum-weight edge ( u , v ) incident on u , and put ( u , v ) into the minimum
spanning tree under construction. Then, contract all chosen edges (see
Section B.4 ). Rather than contracting these edges one at a time, first
identify sets of vertices that are united into the same new vertex. Then
create the graph that would have resulted from contracting these edges one
at a time, but do so by “renaming” edges according to the sets into which
their endpoints were placed. Several edges from the original graph might be
renamed the same as each other . In such a case, only one edge results, and
its weight is the minimum of the weights of the corresponding original
edges.
Initially , set the minimum spanning tree T  being constructed to be
empty , and for each edge ( u , v ) ∈  E , initialize the two attributes ( u , v ). orig
= ( u , v ) and ( u , v ). c  = w ( u , v ). Use the orig  attribute to reference the edge
from the initial graph that is associated with an edge in the contracted
graph. The c  attribute holds the weight of an edge, and as edges are
contracted, it is updated according to the above scheme for choosing edge
weights. The procedure MST -R EDUCE  on the facing page takes inputs G  and
T , and it returns a contracted graph G ′ with updated attributes orig ′ and c ′.
The procedure also accumulates edges of G  into the minimum spanning tree
T .
a.  Let T  be the set of edges returned by MST -R EDUCE , and let A  be the
minimum spanning tree of the graph G ′ formed by the call MST -P RIM ( G ′,
c ′, r ), where c ′ is the weight attribute on the edges of G ′. E  and r  is any
Page number: 711
vertex in G ′: V . Prove that T  ∪  {( x , y ). orig ′ : ( x , y ) ∈  A } is a minimum
spanning tree of G .
b.  Ar gue that | G ′. V | ≤ | V | /2.
c.  Show how to implement MST -R EDUCE  so that it runs in O ( E ) time. ( Hint:
Use simple data structures.)
d.  Suppose that you run k  phases of MST -R EDUCE , using the output G ′
produced by one phase as the input G  to the next phase and accumulating
edges in T . Ar gue that the overall running time of the k  phases is O ( kE ).
e.  Suppose that after running k  phases of MST -R EDUCE , as in part ( d ), you
run Prim’ s algorithm by calling MST -P RIM ( G ′, c ′, r ), where G ′, with
weight attribute c ′, is returned by the last phase and r  is any vertex in
G ′. V . Show how to pick k  so that the overall running time is O ( E  lg lg V ).
Ar gue that your choice of k  minimizes the overall asymptotic running
time.
f.  For what values of | E | (in terms of | V |) does Prim’ s algorithm with
preprocessing asymptotically beat Prim’ s algorithm without
preprocessing?
MST -R EDUCE ( G , T )
  1 for  each vertex v  ∈  G.V
  2 v .mark  = F ALSE
  3 M AKE -S ET ( v )
  4 for  each vertex u  ∈  G.V
  5 if  u.mark  == F ALSE
  6 choose v  ∈  G.Adj [ u ] such that ( u , v ). c  is minimized
  7 U NION ( u , v )
  8 T  = T  ∪  {( u , v ). orig }
  9 u.mark  = TRUE
10 v .mark  = TRUE
1 1 G ′. V  = {F IND -S ET ( v ) : v  ∈  G.V }
12 G ′. E  = Ø
13 for  each edge ( x , y ) ∈  G.E
14 u  = F IND -S ET ( x )
15 v  = F IND -S ET ( y )
16 if  u  ≠ v
17 if  ( u , v ) ∉  G ′. E
18 G ′. E  = G ′. E  ∪  {(u, v)}
19 ( u, v ). orig ′ = ( x , y ). orig
20 ( u , v ). c ′ = ( x , y ). c
Page number: 712
21 elseif  ( x , y ). c  < ( u , v ).c′
22 ( u , v ). orig ′ = ( x , y ). orig
23 ( u , v ). c ′ = ( x , y ). c
24 construct adjacency lists G ′. Adj  for G ′
25 r eturn  G ′ and T
21-3     Alternative minimum-spanning-tree algorithms
Consider the three algorithms M A YBE -MST -A, M A YBE -MST -B, and M A YBE -
MST -C on the next page. Each one takes a connected graph and a weight
function as input and returns a set of edges T . For each algorithm, either
prove that T  is a minimum spanning tree or prove that T  is not necessarily a
minimum spanning tree. Also describe the most ef ficient implementation of
each algorithm, regardless of whether it computes a minimum spanning
tree.
21-4     Bottleneck spanning tree
A bottleneck spanning tree  T  of an undirected graph G  is a spanning tree of
G  whose lar gest edge weight is minimum over all spanning trees of G . The
value of the bottleneck spanning tree is the weight of the maximum-weight
edge in T .
M A YBE -MST -A( G , w )
1 sort the edges into monotonically decreasing order of edge weights w
2 T  = E
3 for  each edge e , taken in monotonically decreasing order by weight
4 if  T  – { e } is a connected graph
5 T  = T  – { e }
6 r eturn  T
M A YBE -MST -B( G , w )
1 T  = Ø
2 for  each edge e , taken in arbitrary order
3 if  T  ∪  { e } has no cycles
4 T  = T  ∪  { e }
5 r eturn  T
M A YBE -MST -C( G , w )
1 T  = Ø
2 for  each edge e , taken in arbitrary order
3 T  = T  ∪  { e }
4 if  T  has a cycle c
5 let e ′ be a maximum-weight edge on c
Page number: 713
6 T  = T  – { e ′}
7 r eturn  T
a.  Ar gue that a minimum spanning tree is a bottleneck spanning tree.
Part (a) shows that finding a bottleneck spanning tree is no harder than
finding a minimum spanning tree. In the remaining parts, you will show
how to find a bottleneck spanning tree in linear time.
b.  Give a linear -time algorithm that, given a graph G  and an integer b ,
determines whether the value of the bottleneck spanning tree is at most b .
c.  Use your algorithm for part (b) as a subroutine in a linear -time algorithm
for the bottleneck-spanning-tree problem. ( Hint:  Y ou might want to use a
subroutine that contracts sets of edges, as in the MST -R EDUCE  procedure
described in Problem 21-2.)
Chapter notes
T arjan [ 429 ] surveys the minimum-spanning-tree problem and provides
excellent advanced material. Graham and Hell [ 198 ] compiled a history of
the minimum-spanning-tree problem.
T arjan attributes the first minimum-spanning-tree algorithm to a 1926
paper by O. Bor ů vka. Bor ů vka’ s algorithm consists of running O (lg V )
iterations of the procedure MST -R EDUCE  described in Problem 21-2.
Kruskal’ s algorithm was reported by Kruskal [ 272 ] in 1956. The algorithm
commonly known as Prim’ s algorithm was indeed invented by Prim [ 367 ],
but it was also invented earlier by V . Jarník in 1930.
When | E | = Ω( V  lg V ), Prim’ s algorithm, implemented with a Fibonacci
heap, runs in O ( E ) time. For sparser graphs, using a combination of the
ideas from Prim’ s algorithm, Kruskal’ s algorithm, and Bor ů vka’ s algorithm,
together with advanced data structures, Fredman and T arjan [ 156 ] give an
algorithm that runs in O ( E  lg* V ) time. Gabow , Galil, Spencer , and T arjan
[ 165 ] improved this algorithm to run in O ( E  lg lg* V ) time. Chazelle [ 83 ]
gives an algorithm that runs in O ( E  
 ( E , V )) time, where 
 ( E , V ) is the
functional inverse of Ackermann’ s function. (See the chapter notes for
Chapter 19  for a brief discussion of Ackermann’ s function and its inverse.)
Unlike previous minimum-spanning-tree algorithms, Chazelle’ s algorithm
does not follow the greedy method. Pettie and Ramachandran [ 356 ] give an
Page number: 714
algorithm based on precomputed “MST decision trees” that also runs in
O ( E  
 ( E , V )) time.
A related problem is spanning-tree verification : given a graph G  = ( V ,
E ) and a tree T  ⊆  E , determine whether T  is a minimum spanning tree of G .
King [ 254 ] gives a linear -time algorithm to verify a spanning tree, building
on earlier work of Komlós [ 269 ] and Dixon, Rauch, and T arjan [ 120 ].
The above algorithms are all deterministic and fall into the comparison-
based model described in Chapter 8 . Kar ger , Klein, and T arjan [ 243 ] give a
randomized minimum-spanning-tree algorithm that runs in O ( V  + E )
expected time. This algorithm uses recursion in a manner similar to the
linear -time selection algorithm in Section 9.3 : a recursive call on an
auxiliary problem identifies a subset of the edges E ′ that cannot be in any
minimum spanning tree. Another recursive call on E  – E ′ then finds the
minimum spanning tree. The algorithm also uses ideas from Bor ů vka’ s
algorithm and King’ s algorithm for spanning-tree verification.
Fredman and W illard [ 158 ] showed how to find a minimum spanning
tree in O ( V  + E ) time using a deterministic algorithm that is not comparison
based. Their algorithm assumes that the data are b -bit integers and that the
computer memory consists of addressable b -bit words.
1 The phrase “minimum spanning tree” is a shortened form of the phrase “minimum-weight spanning
tree.” There is no point in minimizing the number of edges in T , since all spanning trees have exactly
| V | − 1 edges by Theorem B.2 on page 1 169.
Page number: 715
22        Single-Sour ce Shortest Paths
Suppose that you need to drive from Oceanside, New Y ork, to Oceanside,
California, by the shortest possible route. Y our GPS contains information
about the entire road network of the United States, including the road
distance between each pair of adjacent intersections. How can your GPS
determine this shortest route?
One possible way is to enumerate all the routes from Oceanside, New Y ork,
to Oceanside, California, add up the distances on each route, and select the
shortest. But even disallowing routes that contain cycles, your GPS would
need to examine an enormous number of possibilities, most of which are
simply not worth considering. For example, a route that passes through
Miami, Florida, is a poor choice, because Miami is several hundred miles
out of the way .
This chapter and Chapter 23  show how to solve such problems
ef ficiently . The input to a shortest-paths problem  is a weighted, directed
graph G  = ( V , E ), with a weight function w  : E  → ℝ  mapping edges to real-
valued weights. The weight  w ( p ) of path p  = 〈 v0 , v1 , … , vk〉  is the sum of
the weights of its constituent edges:
W e define the shortest-path weight  δ( u , v ) from u  to v  by
A shortest path  from vertex u  to vertex v  is then defined as any path p  with
weight w ( p ) = δ( u , v ).
Page number: 716
In the example of going from Oceanside, New Y ork, to Oceanside,
California, your GPS models the road network as a graph: vertices represent
intersections, edges represent road segments between intersections, and
edge weights represent road distances. The goal is to find a shortest path
from a given intersection in Oceanside, New Y ork (say , Brower A venue and
Skillman A venue) to a given intersection in Oceanside, California (say ,
T opeka Street and South Horne Street).
Edge weights can represent metrics other than distances, such as time,
cost, penalties, loss, or any other quantity that accumulates linearly along a
path and that you want to minimize.
The breadth-first-search algorithm from Section 20.2  is a shortest-paths
algorithm that works on unweighted graphs, that is, graphs in which each
edge has unit weight. Because many of the concepts from breadth-first
search arise in the study of shortest paths in weighted graphs, you might
want to review Section 20.2  before proceeding.
V ariants
This chapter focuses on the single-source shortest-paths problem : given a
graph G  = ( V , E ), find a shortest path from a given source vertex  s  ∈  V  to
every vertex v  ∈  V . The algorithm for the single-source problem can solve
many other problems, including the following variants.
Single-destination shortest-paths pr oblem:  Find a shortest path to a given
destination vertex  t  from each vertex v . By reversing the direction of each
edge in the graph, you can reduce this problem to a single-source
problem.
Single-pair shortest-path pr oblem:  Find a shortest path from u  to v  for
given vertices u  and v . If you solve the single-source problem with source
vertex u , you solve this problem also. Moreover , all known algorithms for
this problem have the same worst-case asymptotic running time as the
best single-source algorithms.
All-pairs shortest-paths pr oblem:  Find a shortest path from u  to v  for
every pair of vertices u  and v . Although you can solve this problem by
running a single-source algorithm once from each vertex, you often can
solve it faster . Additionally , its structure is interesting in its own right.
Chapter 23  addresses the all-pairs problem in detail.
Page number: 717
Optimal substructur e of a shortest path
Shortest-paths algorithms typically rely on the property that a shortest path
between two vertices contains other shortest paths within it. (The Edmonds-
Karp maximum-flow algorithm in Chapter 24  also relies on this property .)
Recall that optimal substructure is one of the key indicators that dynamic
programming ( Chapter 14 ) and the greedy method ( Chapter 15 ) might
apply . Dijkstra’ s algorithm, which we shall see in Section 22.3 , is a greedy
algorithm, and the Floyd-W arshall algorithm, which finds a shortest path
between every pair of vertices (see Section 23.2 ), is a dynamic-
programming algorithm. The following lemma states the optimal-
substructure property of shortest paths more precisely .
Lemma 22.1 (Subpaths of shortest paths are shortest paths)
Given a weighted, directed graph G  = ( V , E ) with weight function w  : E  →
ℝ  let p  = 〈 v0 , v1 , … , vk〉  be a shortest path from vertex v0  to vertex vk  and,
for any i  and j  such that 0 ≤ i  ≤ j  ≤ k , let pij  = 〈 vi , vi +1 , … , vj〉  be the subpath
of p  from vertex vi  to vertex vj . Then, pij  is a shortest path from vi  to vj .
Proof    Decompose path p  into 
 , so that w ( p ) = w ( p0 i ) +
w ( pij ) + w ( pjk ). Now , assume that there is a path 
  from vi  to vj  with weight 
. Then, 
  is a path from v0  to vk  whose weight 
 is less than w ( p ), which contradicts the assumption that
p  is a shortest path from v0  to vk .
▪
Negative-weight edges
Some instances of the single-source shortest-paths problem may include
edges whose weights are negative. If the graph G  = ( V , E ) contains no
negative-weight cycles reachable from the source s , then for all v  ∈  V , the
shortest-path weight δ( s , v ) remains well defined, even if it has a negative
value. If the graph contains a negative-weight cycle reachable from s ,
however , shortest-path weights are not well defined. No path from s  to a
vertex on the cycle can be a shortest path—you can always find a path with
lower weight by following the proposed “shortest” path and then traversing
Page number: 718
the negative-weight cycle. If there is a negative-weight cycle on some path
from s  to v , we define δ( s , v ) = −∞.
Figure 22.1  illustrates the ef fect of negative weights and negative-weight
cycles on shortest-path weights. Because there is only one path from s  to a
(the path 〈 s , a〉 ), we have δ( s , a ) = w ( s , a ) = 3. Similarly , there is only one
path from s  to b , and so δ( s , b ) = w ( s , a ) + w ( a , b ) = 3 + (−4) = −1. There
are infinitely many paths from s  to c : 〈 s , c〉 , 〈 s , c , d , c〉 , 〈 s , c , d , c , d , c〉 , and
so on. Because the cycle 〈 c , d , c〉  has weight 6 + (−3) = 3 > 0, the shortest
path from s  to c  is 〈 s , c〉 , with weight δ( s , c ) = w ( s , c ) = 5, and the shortest
path from s  to d  is 〈 s , c , d〉 , with weight δ( s , d ) = w ( s , c ) + w ( c , d ) = 1 1.
Analogously , there are infinitely many paths from s  to e : 〈 s , e〉 , 〈 s , e , f , e〉 ,
〈 s , e , f , e , f , e〉 , and so on. Because the cycle 〈 e , f , e〉  has weight 3 + (−6) =
−3 < 0, however , there is no shortest path from s  to e . By traversing the
negative-weight cycle 〈 e , f , e〉  arbitrarily many times, you can find paths
from s  to e  with arbitrarily lar ge negative weights, and so δ( s , e ) = −∞.
Similarly , δ( s , f ) = −∞. Because g  is reachable from f , you can also find
paths with arbitrarily lar ge negative weights from s  to g , and so δ( s , g ) =
−∞. V ertices h , i , and j  also form a negative-weight cycle. They are not
reachable from s , however , and so δ( s , h ) = δ( s , i ) = δ( s , j ) = ∞.
Figur e 22.1  Negative edge weights in a directed graph. The shortest-path weight from source s
appears within each vertex. Because vertices e  and f  form a negative-weight cycle reachable from s ,
they have shortest-path weights of −∞. Because vertex g  is reachable from a vertex whose shortest-
path weight is −∞, it, too, has a shortest-path weight of −∞. V ertices such as h , i , and j  are not
reachable from s , and so their shortest-path weights are ∞, even though they lie on a negative-weight
cycle.
Some shortest-paths algorithms, such as Dijkstra’ s algorithm, assume
that all edge weights in the input graph are nonnegative, as in a road
network. Others, such as the Bellman-Ford algorithm, allow negative-
weight edges in the input graph and produce a correct answer as long as no
Page number: 719
negative-weight cycles are reachable from the source. T ypically , if there is
such a negative-weight cycle, the algorithm can detect and report its
existence.
Cycles
Can a shortest path contain a cycle? As we have just seen, it cannot contain
a negative-weight cycle. Nor can it contain a positive-weight cycle, since
removing the cycle from the path produces a path with the same source and
destination vertices and a lower path weight. That is, if p  = 〈 v0 , v1 , … , vk〉  is
a path and c  = 〈 vi , vi +1 , … , vj〉  is a positive-weight cycle on this path (so
that vi  = vj  and w ( c ) > 0), then the path p ′ = 〈 v0 , v1 , … , vi , vj +1 , vj +2 , … , vk〉
has weight w ( p ′) = w ( p ) − w ( c ) < w ( p ), and so p  cannot be a shortest path
from v0  to vk .
That leaves only 0-weight cycles. Y ou can remove a 0-weight cycle
from any path to produce another path whose weight is the same. Thus, if
there is a shortest path from a source vertex s  to a destination vertex v  that
contains a 0-weight cycle, then there is another shortest path from s  to v
without this cycle. As long as a shortest path has 0-weight cycles, you can
repeatedly remove these cycles from the path until you have a shortest path
that is cycle-free. Therefore, without loss of generality , assume that shortest
paths have no cycles, that is, they are simple paths. Since any acyclic path
in a graph G  = ( V , E ) contains at most | V | distinct vertices, it also contains at
most | V | − 1 edges. Assume, therefore, that any shortest path contains at
most | V | − 1 edges.
Repr esenting shortest paths
It is usually not enough to compute only shortest-path weights. Most
applications of shortest paths need to know the vertices on shortest paths as
well. For example, if your GPS told you the distance to your destination but
not how to get there, it would not be terribly useful. W e represent shortest
paths similarly to how we represented breadth-first trees in Section 20.2 .
Given a graph G  = ( V , E ), maintain for each vertex v  ∈  V  a predecessor  v .π
that is either another vertex or NIL . The shortest-paths algorithms in this
chapter set the π attributes so that the chain of predecessors originating at a
vertex v  runs backward along a shortest path from s  to v . Thus, given a
Page number: 720
vertex v  for which v .π ≠ NIL , the procedure P RINT -P A TH ( G , s , v ) from
Section 20.2  prints a shortest path from s  to v .
In the midst of executing a shortest-paths algorithm, however , the π
values might not indicate shortest paths. The predecessor subgraph  Gπ  =
( Vπ , Eπ ) induced by the π values is defined the same for single-source
shortest paths as for breadth-first search in equations (20.2) and (20.3) on
page 561:
Vπ  = { v  ∈  V  : v .π ≠ NIL } ∪  { s },
Eπ  = {( v .π, v ) ∈  E  : v  ∈  Vπ  − { s }}.
W e’ll prove that the π values produced by the algorithms in this chapter
have the property that at termination Gπ  is a “shortest-paths tree”—
informally , a rooted tree containing a shortest path from the source s  to
every vertex that is reachable from s. A  shortest-paths tree is like the
breadth-first tree from Section 20.2 , but it contains shortest paths from the
source defined in terms of edge weights instead of numbers of edges. T o be
precise, let G  = ( V , E ) be a weighted, directed graph with weight function w
: E  → ℝ , and assume that G  contains no negative-weight cycles reachable
from the source vertex s  ∈  V , so that shortest paths are well defined.
A shortest-paths tree  rooted at s  is a directed subgraph G ′ = ( V ′, E ′), where
V ′ ⊆  V  and E ′ ⊆  E , such that
1 . V ′ is the set of vertices reachable from s  in G ,
2 . G ′ forms a rooted tree with root s , and
3 . for all v  ∈  V ′, the unique simple path from s  to v  in G ′ is a shortest
path from s  to v  in G .
Page number: 721
Figur e 22.2 (a)  A  weighted, directed graph with shortest-path weights from source s . (b)  The blue
edges form a shortest-paths tree rooted at the source s . (c)  Another shortest-paths tree with the same
root.
Shortest paths are not necessarily unique, and neither are shortest-paths
trees. For example, Figure 22.2  shows a weighted, directed graph and two
shortest-paths trees with the same root.
Relaxation
The algorithms in this chapter use the technique of relaxation . For each
vertex v  ∈  V , the single-source shortest paths algorithms maintain an
attribute v .d , which is an upper bound on the weight of a shortest path from
source s  to v . W e call v .d  a shortest-path estimate . T o initialize the shortest-
path estimates and predecessors, call the Θ( V )-time procedure I NITIALIZE -
S INGLE -S OURCE . After initialization, we have v .π = NIL  for all v  ∈  V , s.d  = 0
and v .d  = ∞ for v  ∈  V  − { s }.
I NITIALIZE -S INGLE -S OURCE ( G , s )
1 for  each vertex v  ∈  G.V
2 v .d  = ∞
3 v .π = NIL
4 s.d  = 0
The process of relaxing  an edge ( u , v ) consists of testing whether going
through vertex u  improves the shortest path to vertex v  found so far and, if
so, updating v .d  and v .π. A relaxation step might decrease the value of the
shortest-path estimate v .d  and update v ’ s predecessor attribute v .π. The
R ELAX  procedure on the following page performs a relaxation step on edge
( u , v ) in O (1) time. Figure 22.3  shows two examples of relaxing an edge,
Page number: 722
one in which a shortest-path estimate decreases and one in which no
estimate changes.
Figur e 22.3  Relaxing an edge ( u , v ) with weight w ( u , v ) = 2. The shortest-path estimate of each
vertex appears within the vertex. (a)  Because v .d  > u.d  + w ( u , v ) prior to relaxation, the value of v .d
decreases. (b)  Since we have v .d  ≤ u.d  + w ( u , v ) before relaxing the edge, the relaxation step leaves
v .d  unchanged.
R ELAX ( u , v , w )
1 if  v .d  > u.d  + w ( u , v )
2 v .d  = u.d  + w ( u , v )
3 v .π = u
Each algorithm in this chapter calls I NITIALIZE -S INGLE -S OURCE  and then
repeatedly relaxes edges.1 Moreover , relaxation is the only means by which
shortest-path estimates and predecessors change. The algorithms in this
chapter dif fer in how many times they relax each edge and the order in
which they relax edges. Dijkstra’ s algorithm and the shortest-paths
algorithm for directed acyclic graphs relax each edge exactly once. The
Bellman-Ford algorithm relaxes each edge | V | − 1 times.
Pr operties of shortest paths and r elaxation
T o prove the algorithms in this chapter correct, we’ll appeal to several
properties of shortest paths and relaxation. W e state these properties here,
and Section 22.5  proves them formally . For your reference, each property
stated here includes the appropriate lemma or corollary number from
Section 22.5 . The latter five of these properties, which refer to shortest-path
estimates or the predecessor subgraph, implicitly assume that the graph is
initialized with a call to I NITIALIZE -S INGLE -S OURCE ( G , s ) and that the only
way that shortest-path estimates and the predecessor subgraph change are
by some sequence of relaxation steps.
Page number: 723
T riangle inequality  (Lemma 22.10)
For any edge ( u , v ) ∈  E , we have δ( s , v ) ≤ δ( s , u ) + w ( u , v ).
Upper -bound pr operty  (Lemma 22.1 1)
W e always have v .d  ≥ δ( s , v ) for all vertices v  ∈  V , and once v .d
achieves the value δ( s , v ), it never changes.
No-path pr operty  (Corollary 22.12)
If there is no path from s  to v , then we always have v .d  = δ( s , v ) = ∞.
Convergence pr operty  (Lemma 22.14)
If s  ⇝  u  → v  is a shortest path in G  for some u , v  ∈  V , and if u.d  = δ( s ,
u ) at any time prior to relaxing edge ( u , v ), then v .d  = δ( s , v ) at all times
afterward.
Path-r elaxation pr operty  (Lemma 22.15)
If p  = 〈 v0 , v1 , … , vk〉  is a shortest path from s  = v0  to vk , and the edges
of p  are relaxed in the order ( v0 , v1 ), ( v1 , v2 ), … , ( vk −1 , vk ), then vk . d  =
δ( s , vk ). This property holds regardless of any other relaxation steps that
occur , even if they are intermixed with relaxations of the edges of p .
Pr edecessor -subgraph pr operty  (Lemma 22.17)
Once v .d  = δ( s , v ) for all v  ∈  V , the predecessor subgraph is a shortest-
paths tree rooted at s .
Chapter outline
Section 22.1  presents the Bellman-Ford algorithm, which solves the single-
source shortest-paths problem in the general case in which edges can have
negative weight. The Bellman-Ford algorithm is remarkably simple, and it
has the further benefit of detecting whether a negative-weight cycle is
reachable from the source. Section 22.2  gives a linear -time algorithm for
computing shortest paths from a single source in a directed acyclic graph.
Section 22.3  covers Dijkstra’ s algorithm, which has a lower running time
than the Bellman-Ford algorithm but requires the edge weights to be
nonnegative. Section 22.4  shows how to use the Bellman-Ford algorithm to
solve a special case of linear programming. Finally , Section 22.5  proves the
properties of shortest paths and relaxation stated above.
This chapter does arithmetic with infinities, and so we need some
conventions for when ∞ or −∞ appears in an arithmetic expression. W e
Page number: 724
assume that for any real number a  ≠ −∞, we have a  + ∞ = ∞ + a  = ∞. Also,
to make our proofs hold in the presence of negative-weight cycles, we
assume that for any real number a  ≠ ∞, we have a  + (−∞) = (−∞) + a  = −∞.
All algorithms in this chapter assume that the directed graph G  is stored
in the adjacency-list representation. Additionally , stored with each edge is
its weight, so that as each algorithm traverses an adjacency list, it can find
edge weights in O (1) time per edge.
22.1    The Bellman-Ford algorithm
The Bellman-Ford algorithm  solves the single-source shortest-paths
problem in the general case in which edge weights may be negative. Given
a weighted, directed graph G  = ( V , E ) with source vertex s  and weight
function w  : E  → ℝ , the Bellman-Ford algorithm returns a boolean value
indicating whether there is a negative-weight cycle that is reachable from
the source. If there is such a cycle, the algorithm indicates that no solution
exists. If there is no such cycle, the algorithm produces the shortest paths
and their weights.
The procedure B ELLMAN -F ORD  relaxes edges, progressively decreasing
an estimate v .d  on the weight of a shortest path from the source s  to each
vertex v  ∈  V  until it achieves the actual shortest-path weight δ( s , v ). The
algorithm returns TRUE  if and only if the graph contains no negative-weight
cycles that are reachable from the source.
B ELLMAN -F ORD ( G , w , s )
1 I NITIALIZE -S INGLE -S OURCE ( G , s )
2 for  i  = 1 to  | G.V | − 1
3 for  each edge ( u , v ) ∈  G.E
4 R ELAX ( u , v , w )
5 for  each edge ( u , v ) = G.E
6 if  v .d  > u.d  + w ( u , v )
7 r eturn  F ALSE
8 r eturn  TRUE
Figure 22.4  shows the execution of the Bellman-Ford algorithm on a
graph with 5 vertices. After initializing the d  and π values of all vertices in
line 1, the algorithm makes | V | − 1 passes over the edges of the graph. Each
pass is one iteration of the for  loop of lines 2–4 and consists of relaxing
Page number: 725
each edge of the graph once. Figures 22.4(b) – (e)  show the state of the
algorithm after each of the four passes over the edges. After making | V | − 1
passes, lines 5–8 check for a negative-weight cycle and return the
appropriate boolean value. (W e’ll see a little later why this check works.)
Figur e 22.4  The execution of the Bellman-Ford algorithm. The source is vertex s . The d  values
appear within the vertices, and blue edges indicate predecessor values: if edge ( u , v ) is blue, then v .π
= u . In this particular example, each pass relaxes the edges in the order ( t , x ), ( t , y ), ( t , z ), ( x , t ), ( y , x ),
( y , z ), ( z , x ), ( z , s ), ( s , t ), ( s , y ). (a)  The situation just before the first pass over the edges. (b)–(e)  The
situation after each successive pass over the edges. V ertices whose shortest-path estimates and
predecessors have changed due to a pass are highlighted in orange. The d  and π values in part (e) are
the final values. The Bellman-Ford algorithm returns TRUE  in this example.
The Bellman-Ford algorithm runs in O ( V2 + VE ) time when the graph is
represented by adjacency lists, since the initialization in line 1 takes Θ( V )
time, each of the | V | − 1 passes over the edges in lines 2–4 takes Θ( V  + E )
time (examining | V | adjacency lists to find the | E | edges), and the for  loop of
lines 5–7 takes O ( V  + E ) time. Fewer than | V | − 1 passes over the edges
sometimes suf fice (see Exercise 22.1-3), which is why we say O ( V2+ VE )
time, rather than Θ( V2+ VE ) time. In the frequent case where | E | = Ω( V ), we
can express this running time as O ( VE ). Exercise 22.1-5 asks you to make
the Bellman-Ford algorithm run in O ( VE ) time even when | E | = o ( V ).
T o prove the correctness of the Bellman-Ford algorithm, we start by
showing that if there are no negative-weight cycles, the algorithm computes
correct shortest-path weights for all vertices reachable from the source.
Page number: 726
Lemma 22.2
Let G  = ( V , E ) be a weighted, directed graph with source vertex s  and
weight function w  : E  → ℝ , and assume that G  contains no negative-weight
cycles that are reachable from s . Then, after the | V | − 1 iterations of the for
loop of lines 2–4 of B ELLMAN -F ORD , v .d  = δ( s , v ) for all vertices v  that are
reachable from s .
Proof    W e prove the lemma by appealing to the path-relaxation property .
Consider any vertex v  that is reachable from s , and let p  = 〈 v0 , v1 , … , vk〉 ,
where v0  = s  and vk  = v , be any shortest path from s  to v . Because shortest
paths are simple, p  has at most | V | − 1 edges, and so k  ≤ | V | − 1. Each of the
| V | − 1 iterations of the for  loop of lines 2–4 relaxes all | E | edges. Among
the edges relaxed in the i th iteration, for i  = 1, 2, … , k , is ( vi −1 , vi ). By the
path-relaxation property , therefore, v .d  = vk .d  = δ( s , vk ) = δ( s , v ).
▪
Corollary 22.3
Let G  = ( V , E ) be a weighted, directed graph with source vertex s  and
weight function w  : E  → ℝ . Then, for each vertex v  ∈  V , there is a path
from s  to v  if and only if B ELLMAN -F ORD  terminates with v .d  < ∞ when it is
run on G .
Proof    The proof is left as Exercise 22.1-2.
▪
Theorem 22.4 (Correctness of the Bellman-Ford algorithm)
Let B ELLMAN -F ORD  be run on a weighted, directed graph G  = ( V , E ) with
source vertex s  and weight function w  : E  → ℝ . If G  contains no negative-
weight cycles that are reachable from s , then the algorithm returns TRUE , v .d
= δ( s , v) for all vertices v  ∈  V , and the predecessor subgraph Gπ  is a
shortest-paths tree rooted at s . If G  does contain a negative-weight cycle
reachable from s , then the algorithm returns F ALSE .
Proof    Suppose that graph G  contains no negative-weight cycles that are
reachable from the source s. W e first prove the claim that at termination, v .d
= δ( s , v ) for all vertices v  ∈  V . If vertex v  is reachable from s , then Lemma
22.2 proves this claim. If v  is not reachable from s , then the claim follows
from the no-path property . Thus, the claim is proven. The predecessor -
Page number: 727
subgraph property , along with the claim, implies that Gπ  is a shortest-paths
tree. Now we use the claim to show that B ELLMAN -F ORD  returns TRUE . At
termination, for all edges ( u , v ) ∈  E  we have
v .d = δ( s , v )
≤ δ( s , u ) + w ( u , v ) (by the triangle inequality)
= u.d  + w ( u , v ),
and so none of the tests in line 6 causes B ELLMAN -F ORD  to return F ALSE .
Therefore, it returns TRUE .
Now , suppose that graph G  contains a negative-weight cycle reachable
from the source s . Let this cycle be c  = 〈 v0 , v1 , … , vk〉 , where v0  = vk , in
which case we have
Assume for the purpose of contradiction that the Bellman-Ford algorithm
returns TRUE . Thus, vi .d  ≤ vi −1 . d  + w ( vi −1 , vi ) for i  = 1, 2, … , k . Summing
the inequalities around cycle c  gives
Since v0  = vk , each vertex in c  appears exactly once in each of the
summations 
  and 
 , and so
Moreover , by Corollary 22.3, vi .d  is finite for i  = 1, 2, … , k . Thus,
which contradicts inequality (22.1). W e conclude that the Bellman-Ford
algorithm returns TRUE  if graph G  contains no negative-weight cycles
reachable from the source, and F ALSE  otherwise.
▪
Page number: 728
Exer cises
22.1-1
Run the Bellman-Ford algorithm on the directed graph of Figure 22.4 , using
vertex z  as the source. In each pass, relax edges in the same order as in the
figure, and show the d  and π values after each pass. Now , change the weight
of edge ( z , x ) to 4 and run the algorithm again, using s  as the source.
22.1-2
Prove Corollary 22.3.
22.1-3
Given a weighted, directed graph G  = ( V , E ) with no negative-weight
cycles, let m  be the maximum over all vertices v  ∈  V  of the minimum
number of edges in a shortest path from the source s  to v . (Here, the shortest
path is by weight, not the number of edges.) Suggest a simple change to the
Bellman-Ford algorithm that allows it to terminate in m  + 1 passes, even if
m  is not known in advance.
22.1-4
Modify the Bellman-Ford algorithm so that it sets v .d  to −∞ for all vertices
v  for which there is a negative-weight cycle on some path from the source
to v .
22.1-5
Suppose that the graph given as input to the Bellman-Ford algorithm is
represented with a list of | E | edges, where each edge indicates the vertices it
leaves and enters, along with its weight. Ar gue that the Bellman-Ford
algorithm runs in O ( VE ) time without the constraint that | E | = Ω( V ). Modify
the Bellman-Ford algorithm so that it runs in O ( VE ) time in all cases when
the input graph is represented with adjacency lists.
22.1-6
Let G  = ( V , E ) be a weighted, directed graph with weight function w  : E  →
ℝ . Give an O ( VE )-time algorithm to find, for all vertices v  ∈  V , the value
δ*( v ) = min {δ( u , v ) : u  ∈  V }.
22.1-7
Page number: 729
Suppose that a weighted, directed graph G  = ( V , E ) contains a negative-
weight cycle. Give an ef ficient algorithm to list the vertices of one such
cycle. Prove that your algorithm is correct.
22.2    Single-sour ce shortest paths in dir ected acyclic graphs
In this section, we introduce one further restriction on weighted, directed
graphs: they are acyclic. That is, we are concerned with weighted dags.
Shortest paths are always well defined in a dag, since even if there are
negative-weight edges, no negative-weight cycles can exist. W e’ll see that if
the edges of a weighted dag G  = ( V , E ) are relaxed according to a
topological sort of its vertices, it takes only Θ( V  + E ) time to compute
shortest paths from a single source.
The algorithm starts by topologically sorting the dag (see Section 20.4 )
to impose a linear ordering on the vertices. If the dag contains a path from
vertex u  to vertex v , then u  precedes v  in the topological sort. The D AG -
S HOR TEST -P A THS  procedure makes just one pass over the vertices in the
topologically sorted order . As it processes each vertex, it relaxes each edge
that leaves the vertex. Figure 22.5  shows the execution of this algorithm.
D AG -S HOR TEST -P A THS ( G , w , s )
1 topologically sort the vertices of G
2 I NITIALIZE -S INGLE -S OURCE ( G , s )
3 for  each vertex u  ∈  G.V , taken in topologically sorted order
4 for  each vertex v  in G.Adj [ u ]
5 R ELAX ( u , v , w )
Let’ s analyze the running time of this algorithm. As shown in Section
20.4 , the topological sort of line 1 takes Θ( V  + E ) time. The call of
I NITIALIZE -S INGLE-SOURCE  in line 2 takes Θ( V ) time. The for  loop of lines
3–5 makes one iteration per vertex. Altogether , the for  loop of lines 4–5
relaxes each edge exactly once. (W e have used an aggregate analysis here.)
Because each iteration of the inner for  loop takes Θ(1) time, the total
running time is Θ( V  + E ), which is linear in the size of an adjacency-list
representation of the graph.
The following theorem shows that the D AG -S HOR TEST -P A THS  procedure
correctly computes the shortest paths.
Page number: 730
Theorem 22.5
If a weighted, directed graph G  = ( V , E ) has source vertex s  and no cycles,
then at the termination of the D AG -S HOR TEST -P A THS  procedure, v .d  = δ( s , v )
for all vertices v  ∈  V , and the predecessor subgraph Gπ  is a shortest-paths
tree.
Proof    W e first show that v .d  = δ( s , v ) for all vertices v  ∈  V  at termination.
If v  is not reachable from s , then v .d  = δ( s , v ) = 1 by the no-path property .
Now , suppose that v  is reachable from s , so that there is a shortest path p  =
〈 v0 , v1 , … , vk〉 , where v0  = s  and vk  = v . Because D AG -S HOR TEST -P A THS
processes the vertices in topologically sorted order , it relaxes the edges on p
in the order ( v0 , v1 ), ( v1 , v2 ), … , ( vk −1 , vk ). The path-relaxation property
implies that vi .d  = δ( s , vi ) at termination for i  = 0, 1, … , k . Finally , by the
predecessor -subgraph property , Gπ  is a shortest-paths tree.
▪
A useful application of this algorithm arises in determining critical paths
in PERT chart2 analysis. A  job consists of several tasks. Each task takes a
certain amount of time, and some tasks must be completed before others
can be started. For example, if the job is to build a house, then the
foundation must be completed before starting to frame the exterior walls,
which must be completed before starting on the roof. Some tasks require
more than one other task to be completed before they can be started: before
the drywall can be installed over the wall framing, both the electrical
system and plumbing must be installed. A dag models the tasks and
dependencies. Edges represent tasks, with the weight of an edge indicating
the time required to perform the task. V ertices represent “milestones,”
which are achieved when all the tasks represented by the edges entering the
vertex have been completed. If edge ( u , v ) enters vertex v  and edge ( v , x )
leaves v , then task ( u , v ) must be completed before task ( v , x ) is started. A
path through this dag represents a sequence of tasks that must be performed
in a particular order . A critical path  is a longest  path through the dag,
corresponding to the longest time to perform any sequence of tasks. Thus,
the weight of a critical path provides a lower bound on the total time to
perform all the tasks, even if as many tasks as possible are performed
simultaneously . Y ou can find a critical path by either
Page number: 731
negating the edge weights and running D AG -S HOR TEST -P A THS , or
running D AG -S HOR TEST -P A THS , but replacing “∞” by “−∞” in line 2
of I NITIALIZE -S INGLE -S OURCE  and “>” by “<” in the R ELAX  procedure.
Figur e 22.5  The execution of the algorithm for shortest paths in a directed acyclic graph. The
vertices are topologically sorted from left to right. The source vertex is s . The d  values appear within
the vertices, and blue edges indicate the π values. (a)  The situation before the first iteration of the for
loop of lines 3–5. (b)–(g)  The situation after each iteration of the for  loop of lines 3–5. Blue vertices
have had their outgoing edges relaxed. The vertex highlighted in orange was used as u  in that
iteration. Each edge highlighted in orange caused a d  value to change when it was relaxed in that
iteration. The values shown in part (g) are the final values.
Exer cises
22.2-1
Show the result of running D AG -S HOR TEST -P A THS  on the directed acyclic
graph of Figure 22.5 , using vertex r  as the source.
22.2-2
Suppose that you change line 3 of D AG -S HOR TEST -P A THS  to read
Page number: 732
3 for  the first | V | − 1 vertices, taken in topologically sorted order
Show that the procedure remains correct.
22.2-3
An alternative way to represent a PER T chart looks more like the dag of
Figure 20.7  on page 574. V ertices represent tasks and edges represent
sequencing constraints, that is, edge ( u , v ) indicates that task u  must be
performed before task v . V ertices, not edges, have weights. Modify the
D AG -S HOR TEST -P A THS  procedure so that it finds a longest path in a directed
acyclic graph with weighted vertices in linear time.
★  22.2-4
Give an ef ficient algorithm to count the total number of paths in a directed
acyclic graph. The count should include all paths between all pairs of
vertices and all paths with 0 edges. Analyze your algorithm.
22.3    Dijkstra’ s algorithm
Dijkstra’ s algorithm solves the single-source shortest-paths problem on a
weighted, directed graph G  = ( V , E ), but it requires nonnegative weights on
all edges: w ( u , v ) ≥ 0 for each edge ( u , v ) ∈  E . As we shall see, with a good
implementation, the running time of Dijkstra’ s algorithm is lower than that
of the Bellman-Ford algorithm.
Y ou can think of Dijkstra’ s algorithm as generalizing breadth-first search
to weighted graphs. A wave emanates from the source, and the first time
that a wave arrives at a vertex, a new wave emanates from that vertex.
Whereas breadth-first search operates as if each wave takes unit time to
traverse an edge, in a weighted graph, the time for a wave to traverse an
edge is given by the edge’ s weight. Because a shortest path in a weighted
graph might not have the fewest edges, a simple, first-in, first-out queue
won’ t suf fice for choosing the next vertex from which to send out a wave.
Instead, Dijkstra’ s algorithm maintains a set S  of vertices whose final
shortest-path weights from the source s  have already been determined. The
algorithm repeatedly selects the vertex u  ∈  V  – S  with the minimum
shortest-path estimate, adds u  into S , and relaxes all edges leaving u . The
procedure D IJKSTRA  replaces the first-in, first-out queue of breadth-first
search by a min-priority queue Q  of vertices, keyed by their d  values.
Page number: 733
D IJKSTRA ( G , w , s )
  1 I NITIALIZE -S INGLE -S OURCE ( G , s )
  2 S  = Ø
  3 Q  = Ø
  4 for  each vertex u  ∈  G.V
  5 I NSER T ( Q, u )
  6 while  Q  ≠ Ø
  7 u  = E XTRACT -M IN ( Q )
  8 S = S  ∪  {u}
  9 for  each vertex v  in G.Adj [ u ]
10 R ELAX ( u , v , w )
1 1 if  the call of R ELAX  decreased v .d
12 D ECREASE -K EY ( Q , v , v .d )
Dijkstra’ s algorithm relaxes edges as shown in Figure 22.6 . Line 1
initializes the d  and π values in the usual way , and line 2 initializes the set S
to the empty set. The algorithm maintains the invariant that Q  = V  − S  at the
start of each iteration of the while  loop of lines 6–12. Lines 3–5 initialize
the min-priority queue Q  to contain all the vertices in V . Since S  = Ø at that
time, the invariant is true upon first reaching line 6. Each time through the
while  loop of lines 6–12, line 7 extracts a vertex u  from Q  = V  − S  and line
8 adds it to set S , thereby maintaining the invariant. (The first time through
this loop, u  = s .) V ertex u , therefore, has the smallest shortest-path estimate
of any vertex in V  − S . Then, lines 9–12 relax each edge ( u , v ) leaving u ,
thus updating the estimate v .d  and the predecessor v .π if the shortest path to
v  found so far improves by going through u . Whenever a relaxation step
changes the d  and π values, the call to D ECREASE -K EY  in line 12 updates the
min-priority queue. The algorithm never inserts vertices into Q  after the for
loop of lines 4–5, and each vertex is extracted from Q  and added to S
exactly once, so that the while  loop of lines 6–12 iterates exactly | V | times.
Page number: 734
Figur e 22.6  The execution of Dijkstra’ s algorithm. The source s  is the leftmost vertex. The shortest-
path estimates appear within the vertices, and blue edges indicate predecessor values. Blue vertices
belong to the set S , and tan vertices are in the min-priority queue Q  = V  − S . (a)  The situation just
before the first iteration of the while  loop of lines 6–12. (b)–(f)  The situation after each successive
iteration of the while  loop. In each part, the vertex highlighted in orange was chosen as vertex u  in
line 7, and each edge highlighted in orange caused a d  value and a predecessor to change when the
edge was relaxed. The d  values and predecessors shown in part (f) are the final values.
Because Dijkstra’ s algorithm always chooses the “lightest” or “closest”
vertex in V  − S  to add to set S , you can think of it as using a greedy strategy .
Chapter 15  explains greedy strategies in detail, but you need not have read
that chapter to understand Dijkstra’ s algorithm. Greedy strategies do not
always yield optimal results in general, but as the following theorem and its
corollary show , Dijkstra’ s algorithm does indeed compute shortest paths.
The key is to show that u.d  = δ( s , u ) each time it adds a vertex u  to set S .
Figur e 22.7  The proof of Theorem 22.6. V ertex u  is selected to be added into set S  in line 7 of
D IJKSTRA . V ertex y  is the first vertex on a shortest path from the source s  to vertex u  that is not in
set S , and x  ∈  S  is y ’ s predecessor on that shortest path. The subpath from y  to u  may or may not re-
enter set S .
Page number: 735
Theorem 22.6 (Correctness of Dijkstra’ s algorithm)
Dijkstra’ s algorithm, run on a weighted, directed graph G  = ( V , E ) with
nonnegative weight function w  and source vertex s , terminates with u.d  =
δ( s , u ) for all vertices u  ∈  V .
Proof    W e will show that at the start of each iteration of the while  loop of
lines 6–12, we have v .d  = δ( s , v ) for all v  ∈  S . The algorithm terminates
when S  = V , so that v .d  = δ( s , v ) for all v  ∈  V .
The proof is by induction on the number of iterations of the while  loop,
which equals | S | at the start of each iteration. There are two bases: for | S | =
0, so that S  = Ø and the claim is trivially true, and for | S | = 1, so that S  = { s }
and s.d  = δ( s , s ) = 0.
For the inductive step, the inductive hypothesis is that v .d  = δ( s , v ) for all
v  ∈  S . The algorithm extracts vertex u  from V  − S . Because the algorithm
adds u  into S , we need to show that u.d  = δ( s , u ) at that time. If there is no
path from s  to u , then we are done, by the no-path property . If there is a path
from s  to u , then, as Figure 22.7  shows, let y  be the first vertex on a shortest
path from s  to u  that is not in S , and let x  ∈  S  be the predecessor of y  on that
shortest path. (W e could have y  = u  or x  = s .) Because y  appears no later
than u  on the shortest path and all edge weights are nonnegative, we have
δ( s , y ) ≤ δ( s , u ). Because the call of E XTRACT -M IN  in line 7 returned u  as
having the minimum d  value in V  − S , we also have u.d  ≤ y .d , and the
upper -bound property gives δ( s , u ) ≤ u.d .
Since x  ∈  S , the inductive hypothesis implies that x.d  = δ( s , x ). During
the iteration of the while  loop that added x  into S , edge ( x , y ) was relaxed.
By the conver gence property , y .d  received the value of δ( s , y ) at that time.
Thus, we have
δ( s , y ) ≤ δ( s , u ) ≤ u.d  ≤ y .d  and y .d  = δ( s , y ),
so that
δ( s , y ) = δ( s , u ) = u.d  = y .d .
Hence, u.d  = δ( s , u ), and by the upper -bound property , this value never
changes again.
▪
Corollary 22.7
Page number: 736
After Dijkstra’ s algorithm is run on a weighted, directed graph G  = ( V , E )
with nonnegative weight function w  and source vertex s , the predecessor
subgraph Gπ  is a shortest-paths tree rooted at s .
Proof    Immediate from Theorem 22.6 and the predecessor -subgraph
property .
▪
Analysis
How fast is Dijkstra’ s algorithm? It maintains the min-priority queue Q  by
calling three priority-queue operations: I NSER T  (in line 5), E XTRACT -M IN  (in
line 7), and D ECREASE -K EY  (in line 12). The algorithm calls both I NSER T  and
E XTRACT -M IN  once per vertex. Because each vertex u  ∈  V  is added to set S
exactly once, each edge in the adjacency list Adj [ u ] is examined in the for
loop of lines 9–12 exactly once during the course of the algorithm. Since
the total number of edges in all the adjacency lists is | E |, this for  loop
iterates a total of | E | times, and thus the algorithm calls D ECREASE -K EY  at
most | E | times overall. (Observe once again that we are using aggregate
analysis.)
Just as in Prim’ s algorithm, the running time of Dijkstra’ s algorithm
depends on the specific implementation of the min-priority queue Q . A
simple implementation takes advantage of the vertices being numbered 1 to
| V |: simply store v .d  in the v th entry of an array . Each I NSER T  and D ECREASE -
K EY  operation takes O (1) time, and each E XTRACT -M IN  operation takes
O ( V ) time (since it has to search through the entire array), for a total time of
O ( V2 + E ) = O ( V2).
If the graph is suf ficiently sparse—in particular , E  = o ( V2/lg V )—you
can improve the running time by implementing the min-priority queue with
a binary min-heap that includes a way to map between vertices and their
corresponding heap elements. Each E XTRACT -M IN  operation then takes O (lg
V ) time. As before, there are | V | such operations. The time to build the
binary min-heap is O ( V ). (As noted in Section 21.2 , you don’ t even need to
call B UILD -M IN -H EAP .) Each D ECREASE -K EY  operation takes O (lg V ) time,
and there are still at most | E | such operations. The total running time is
therefore O (( V  + E ) lg V ), which is O ( E  lg V ) in the typical case that | E | =
Page number: 737
Ω( V ). This running time improves upon the straightforward O ( V2)-time
implementation if E  = o ( V2/lg V ).
By implementing the min-priority queue with a Fibonacci heap (see
page 478), you can improve the running time to O ( V  lg V  + E ). The
amortized cost of each of the | V | E XTRACT -M IN  operations is O (lg V ), and
each D ECREASE -K EY  call, of which there are at most | E |, takes only O (1)
amortized time. Historically , the development of Fibonacci heaps was
motivated by the observation that Dijkstra’ s algorithm typically makes
many more D ECREASE -K EY  calls than E XTRACT -M IN  calls, so that any
method of reducing the amortized time of each D ECREASE -K EY  operation to
o (lg V ) without increasing the amortized time of E XTRACT -M IN  would yield
an asymptotically faster implementation than with binary heaps.
Dijkstra’ s algorithm resembles both breadth-first search (see Section
20.2 ) and Prim’ s algorithm for computing minimum spanning trees (see
Section 21.2 ). It is like breadth-first search in that set S  corresponds to the
set of black vertices in a breadth-first search. Just as vertices in S  have their
final shortest-path weights, so do black vertices in a breadth-first search
have their correct breadth-first distances. Dijkstra’ s algorithm is like Prim’ s
algorithm in that both algorithms use a min-priority queue to find the
“lightest” vertex outside a given set (the set S  in Dijkstra’ s algorithm and
the tree being grown in Prim’ s algorithm), add this vertex into the set, and
adjust the weights of the remaining vertices outside the set accordingly .
Exer cises
22.3-1
Run Dijkstra’ s algorithm on the directed graph of Figure 22.2 , first using
vertex s  as the source and then using vertex z  as the source. In the style of
Figure 22.6 , show the d  and π values and the vertices in set S  after each
iteration of the while  loop.
22.3-2
Give a simple example of a directed graph with negative-weight edges for
which Dijkstra’ s algorithm produces an incorrect answer . Why doesn’ t the
proof of Theorem 22.6 go through when negative-weight edges are
allowed?
22.3-3
Page number: 738
Suppose that you change line 6 of Dijkstra’ s algorithm to read
6   while  | Q | > 1
This change causes the while  loop to execute | V | − 1 times instead of | V |
times. Is this proposed algorithm correct?
22.3-4
Modify the D IJKSTRA  procedure so that the priority queue Q  is more like the
queue in the BFS procedure in that it contains only vertices that have been
reached from source s  so far: Q  ⊆  V  − S  and v  ∈  Q  implies v .d  ≠ ∞.
22.3-5
Professor Gaedel has written a program that he claims implements
Dijkstra’ s algorithm. The program produces v .d  and v .π for each vertex v  ∈
V . Give an O ( V  + E )-time algorithm to check the output of the professor ’ s
program. It should determine whether the d  and π attributes match those of
some shortest-paths tree. Y ou may assume that all edge weights are
nonnegative.
22.3-6
Professor Newman thinks that he has worked out a simpler proof of
correctness for Dijkstra’ s algorithm. He claims that Dijkstra’ s algorithm
relaxes the edges of every shortest path in the graph in the order in which
they appear on the path, and therefore the path-relaxation property applies
to every vertex reachable from the source. Show that the professor is
mistaken by constructing a directed graph for which Dijkstra’ s algorithm
relaxes the edges of a shortest path out of order .
22.3-7
Consider a directed graph G  = ( V , E ) on which each edge ( u , v ) ∈  E  has an
associated value r ( u , v ), which is a real number in the range 0 ≤ r ( u , v ) ≤ 1
that represents the reliability of a communication channel from vertex u  to
vertex v . Interpret r ( u , v ) as the probability that the channel from u  to v  will
not fail, and assume that these probabilities are independent. Give an
ef ficient algorithm to find the most reliable path between two given
vertices.
22.3-8
Page number: 739
Let G  = ( V , E ) be a weighted, directed graph with positive weight function
w  : E  → {1, 2, … , W } for some positive integer W , and assume that no two
vertices have the same shortest-path weights from source vertex s . Now
define an unweighted, directed graph G ′ = ( V  ∪  V ′, E ′) by replacing each
edge ( u , v ) ∈  E  with w ( u , v ) unit-weight edges in series. How many vertices
does G ′ have? Now suppose that you run a breadth-first search on G ′. Show
that the order in which the breadth-first search of G ′ colors vertices in V
black is the same as the order in which Dijkstra’ s algorithm extracts the
vertices of V  from the priority queue when it runs on G .
22.3-9
Let G  = ( V , E ) be a weighted, directed graph with nonnegative weight
function w  : E  → {0, 1, … , W } for some nonnegative integer W . Modify
Dijkstra’ s algorithm to compute the shortest paths from a given source
vertex s  in O ( W V  + E ) time.
22.3-10
Modify your algorithm from Exercise 22.3-9 to run in O (( V  + E ) lg W )
time. ( Hint:  How many distinct shortest-path estimates can V  − S  contain at
any point in time?)
22.3-1 1
Suppose that you are given a weighted, directed graph G  = ( V , E ) in which
edges that leave the source vertex s  may have negative weights, all other
edge weights are nonnegative, and there are no negative-weight cycles.
Ar gue that Dijkstra’ s algorithm correctly finds shortest paths from s  in this
graph.
22.3-12
Suppose that you have a weighted directed graph G  = ( V , E ) in which all
edge weights are positive real values in the range [ C , 2 C ] for some positive
constant C . Modify Dijkstra’ s algorithm so that it runs in O ( V  + E ) time.
22.4    Differ ence constraints and shortest paths
Chapter 29  studies the general linear -programming problem, showing how
to optimize a linear function subject to a set of linear inequalities. This
section investigates a special case of linear programming that reduces to
Page number: 740
finding shortest paths from a single source. The Bellman-Ford algorithm
then solves the resulting single-source shortest-paths problem, thereby also
solving the linear -programming problem.
Linear pr ogramming
In the general linear-programming problem , the input is an m  × n  matrix A ,
an m -vector b , and an n -vector c . The goal is to find a vector x  of n  elements
that maximizes the objective function  
  subject to the m  constraints
given by Ax  ≤ b .
The most popular method for solving linear programs is the simplex
algorithm , which Section 29.1  discusses. Although the simplex algorithm
does not always run in time polynomial in the size of its input, there are
other linear -programming algorithms that do run in polynomial time. W e
of fer here two reasons to understand the setup of linear -programming
problems. First, if you know that you can cast a given problem as a
polynomial-sized linear -programming problem, then you immediately have
a polynomial-time algorithm to solve the problem. Second, faster
algorithms exist for many special cases of linear programming. For
example, the single-pair shortest-path problem (Exercise 22.4-4) and the
maximum-flow problem (Exercise 24.1-5) are special cases of linear
programming.
Sometimes the objective function does not matter: it’ s enough just to
find any feasible solution , that is, any vector x  that satisfies Ax  ≤ b , or to
determine that no feasible solution exists. This section focuses on one such
feasibility problem .
Systems of differ ence constraints
In a system of dif ference constraints , each row of the linear -programming
matrix A  contains one 1 and one −1, and all other entries of A  are 0. Thus,
the constraints given by Ax  ≤ b  are a set of m dif ference constraints
involving n  unknowns, in which each constraint is a simple linear inequality
of the form
xj  − xi  ≤ bk ,
where 1 ≤ i , j  ≤ n , i  ≠ j , and 1 ≤ k  ≤ m .
Page number: 741
For example, consider the problem of finding a 5-vector x  = ( xi ) that
satisfies
This problem is equivalent to finding values for the unknowns x1 , x2 , x3 , x4 ,
x5 , satisfying the following 8 dif ference constraints:
One solution to this problem is x  = (−5, −3, 0, −1, −4), which you can verify
directly by checking each inequality . In fact, this problem has more than
one solution. Another is x ′ = (0, 2, 5, 4, 1). These two solutions are related:
each component of x ′ is 5 lar ger than the corresponding component of x .
This fact is not mere coincidence.
Lemma 22.8
Let x  = ( x1 , x2 , … , xn ) be a solution to a system A x  ≤ b  of dif ference
constraints, and let d  be any constant. Then x  + d  = ( x1  + d , x2  + d , … , xn  +
d ) is a solution to Ax  ≤ b  as well.
Proof    For each xi  and xj , we have ( xj  + d ) − ( xi  + d ) = xj  − xi . Thus, if x
satisfies Ax  ≤ b , so does x  + d .
▪
Systems of dif ference constraints occur in various applications. For
example, the unknowns xi  might be times at which events are to occur . Each
constraint states that at least a certain amount of time, or at most a certain
Page number: 742
amount of time, must elapse between two events. Perhaps the events are
jobs to be performed during the assembly of a product. If the manufacturer
applies an adhesive that takes 2 hours to set at time x1  and has to wait until
it sets to install a part at time x2 , then there is a constraint that x2  ≥ x1  + 2 or ,
equivalently , that x1  − x2  ≤ −2. Alternatively , the manufacturer might
require the part to be installed after the adhesive has been applied but no
later than the time that the adhesive has set halfway . In this case, there is a
pair of constraints x2  ≥ x1  and x2  ≤ x1  + 1 or , equivalently , x1  − x2  ≤ 0 and x2
− x1  ≤ 1.
If all the constraints have nonnegative numbers on the right-hand side—
that is, if bi  ≥ 0 for i  = 1, 2, … , m —then finding a feasible solution is
trivial: just set all the unknowns xi  equal to each other . Then all the
dif ferences are 0, and every constraint is satisfied. The problem of finding a
feasible solution to a system of dif ference constraints is interesting only if at
least one constraint has bi  < 0.
Constraint graphs
W e can interpret systems of dif ference constraints from a graph-theoretic
point of view . For a system Ax  ≤ b  of dif ference constraints, let’ s view the m
× n  linear -programming matrix A  as the transpose of an incidence matrix
(see Exercise 20.1-7) for a graph with n  vertices and m  edges. Each vertex
vi  in the graph, for i  = 1, 2, … , n , corresponds to one of the n  unknown
variables xi . Each directed edge in the graph corresponds to one of the m
inequalities involving two unknowns.
More formally , given a system Ax  ≤ b  of dif ference constraints, the
corresponding constraint graph  is a weighted, directed graph G  = ( V , E ),
where
V  = { v0 , v1 , … , vn }
and
E  = {( v i , v j ) : x j  − x i  ≤ b k  is a constraint}
   ∪  {( v 0 , v 1 ), ( v 0 , v 2 ), ( v 0 , v 3 ), … , ( v 0 , v n )}.
Page number: 743
The constraint graph includes the additional vertex v0 , as we shall see
shortly , to guarantee that the graph has some vertex that can reach all other
vertices. Thus, the vertex set V  consists of a vertex vi  for each unknown xi ,
plus an additional vertex v0 . The edge set E  contains an edge for each
dif ference constraint, plus an edge ( v0 , vi ) for each unknown xi . If xj  − xi  ≤
bk  is a dif ference constraint, then the weight of edge ( vi , vj ) is w ( vi , vj ) = bk .
The weight of each edge leaving v0  is 0. Figure 22.8  shows the constraint
graph for the system (22.2)–(22.9) of dif ference constraints.
Figur e 22.8  The constraint graph corresponding to the system (22.2)–(22.9) of dif ference constraints.
The value of δ( v 0 , v i ) appears in each vertex v i . One feasible solution to the system is x  = (−5, −3, 0,
−1, −4).
The following theorem shows how to solve a system of dif ference
constraints by finding shortest-path weights in the corresponding constraint
graph.
Theorem 22.9
Given a system Ax  ≤ b  of dif ference constraints, let G  = ( V , E ) be the
corresponding constraint graph. If G  contains no negative-weight cycles,
then
is a feasible solution for the system. If G  contains a negative-weight cycle,
then there is no feasible solution for the system.
Proof    W e first show that if the constraint graph contains no negative-
weight cycles, then equation (22.10) gives a feasible solution. Consider any
Page number: 744
edge ( vi , vj ) ∈  E . The triangle inequality implies that δ( v0 , vj ) ≤ δ( v0 , vi ) +
w ( vi , vj ), which is equivalent to δ( v0 , vj )−δ( v0 , vi ) ≤ w ( vi , vj ). Thus, letting xi
= δ( v0 , vi ) and xj  = δ( v0 , vj ) satisfies the dif ference constraint xj  − xi  ≤ w ( vi ,
vj ) that corresponds to edge ( vi , vj ).
Now we show that if the constraint graph contains a negative-weight
cycle, then the system of dif ference constraints has no feasible solution.
W ithout loss of generality , let the negative-weight cycle be c  = 〈 v1 , v2 , … ,
vk〉 , where v1  = vk . (The vertex v0  cannot be on cycle c , because it has no
entering edges.) Cycle c  corresponds to the following dif ference constraints:
x 2  − x 1 ≤ w ( v 1 , v 2 ),
x 3  − x 2 ≤ w ( v 2 , v 3 ),
⋮
x k −1  − x k −2 ≤ w ( v k −2 , v k −1 ),
x k  − x k −1 ≤ w ( v k −1 , v k ).
W e’ll assume that x  has a solution satisfying each of these k  inequalities and
then derive a contradiction. The solution must also satisfy the inequality
that results from summing the k  inequalities together . In summing the left-
hand sides, each unknown xi  is added in once and subtracted out once
(remember that v1  = vk  implies x1  = xk ), so that the left-hand side sums to 0.
The right-hand side sums to the weight w ( c ) of the cycle, giving 0 ≤ w ( c ).
But since c  is a negative-weight cycle, w ( c ) < 0, and we obtain the
contradiction that 0 ≤ w ( c ) < 0.
▪
Solving systems of differ ence constraints
Theorem 22.9 suggests how to use the Bellman-Ford algorithm to solve a
system of dif ference constraints. Because the constraint graph contains
edges from the source vertex v0  to all other vertices, any negative-weight
cycle in the constraint graph is reachable from v0 . If the Bellman-Ford
algorithm returns TRUE , then the shortest-path weights give a feasible
solution to the system. In Figure 22.8 , for example, the shortest-path
weights provide the feasible solution x  = (−5, −3, 0, −1, −4), and by Lemma
22.8, x  = ( d  − 5, d  − 3, d , d  − 1, d  − 4) is also a feasible solution for any
Page number: 745
constant d . If the Bellman-Ford algorithm returns F ALSE , there is no feasible
solution to the system of dif ference constraints.
A system of dif ference constraints with m  constraints on n  unknowns
produces a graph with n  + 1 vertices and n  + m  edges. Thus, the Bellman-
Ford algorithm provides a way to solve the system in O (( n  + 1)( n  + m )) =
O ( n2 + nm ) time. Exercise 22.4-5 asks you to modify the algorithm to run in
O ( nm ) time, even if m  is much less than n .
Exer cises
22.4-1
Find a feasible solution or determine that no feasible solution exists for the
following system of dif ference constraints:
x 1  − x 2 ≤ 1,
x 1  − x 4 ≤ −4,
x 2  − x 3 ≤ 2,
x 2  − x 5 ≤ 7,
x 2  − x 6 ≤ 5,
x 3  − x 6 ≤ 10,
x 4  − x 2 ≤ 2,
x 5  − x 1 ≤ −1,
x 5  − x 4 ≤ 3,
x 6  − x 3 ≤ −8.
22.4-2
Find a feasible solution or determine that no feasible solution exists for the
following system of dif ference constraints:
x 1  − x 2 ≤ 4,
x 1  − x 5 ≤ 5,
x 2  − x 4 ≤ −6,
x 3  − x 2 ≤ 1,
x 4  − x 1 ≤ 3,
x 4  − x 3 ≤ 5,
x 4  − x 5 ≤ 10,
x 5  − x 3 ≤ −4,
Page number: 746
x 5  − x 4 ≤ −8.
22.4-3
Can any shortest-path weight from the new vertex v0  in a constraint graph
be positive? Explain.
22.4-4
Express the single-pair shortest-path problem as a linear program.
22.4-5
Show how to modify the Bellman-Ford algorithm slightly so that when
using it to solve a system of dif ference constraints with m  inequalities on n
unknowns, the running time is O ( nm ).
22.4-6
Consider adding equality constraints  of the form xi  = xj  + bk  to a system of
dif ference constraints. Show how to solve this variety of constraint system.
22.4-7
Show how to solve a system of dif ference constraints by a Bellman-Ford-
like algorithm that runs on a constraint graph without the extra vertex v0 .
★  22.4-8
Let Ax  ≤ b  be a system of m  dif ference constraints in n  unknowns. Show
that the Bellman-Ford algorithm, when run on the corresponding constraint
graph, maximizes 
  subject to Ax  ≤ b  and xi  ≤ 0 for all xi .
★  22.4-9
Show that the Bellman-Ford algorithm, when run on the constraint graph
for a system Ax  ≤ b  of dif ference constraints, minimizes the quantity (max
{ xi }−min { xi }) subject to Ax  ≤ b . Explain how this fact might come in
handy if the algorithm is used to schedule construction jobs.
22.4-10
Suppose that every row in the matrix A  of a linear program Ax  ≤ b
corresponds to a dif ference constraint, a single-variable constraint of the
form xi  ≤ bk , or a single-variable constraint of the form − xi  ≤ bk . Show how
Page number: 747
to adapt the Bellman-Ford algorithm to solve this variety of constraint
system.
22.4-1 1
Give an ef ficient algorithm to solve a system Ax  ≤ b  of dif ference
constraints when all of the elements of b  are real-valued and all of the
unknowns xi  must be integers.
★  22.4-12
Give an ef ficient algorithm to solve a system Ax  ≤ b  of dif ference
constraints when all of the elements of b  are real-valued and a specified
subset of some, but not necessarily all, of the unknowns xi  must be integers.
22.5    Pr oofs of shortest-paths pr operties
Throughout this chapter , our correctness ar guments have relied on the
triangle inequality , upper -bound property , no-path property , conver gence
property , path-relaxation property , and predecessor -subgraph property . W e
stated these properties without proof on page 61 1. In this section, we prove
them.
The triangle inequality
In studying breadth-first search ( Section 20.2 ), we proved as Lemma 20.1 a
simple property of shortest distances in unweighted graphs. The triangle
inequality generalizes the property to weighted graphs.
Lemma 22.10 (T riangle inequality)
Let G  = ( V , E ) be a weighted, directed graph with weight function w  : E  →
ℝ  and source vertex s . Then, for all edges ( u , v ) ∈  E ,
δ( s , v ) ≤ δ( s , u ) + w ( u , v ).
Proof    Suppose that p  is a shortest path from source s  to vertex v . Then p
has no more weight than any other path from s  to v . Specifically , path p  has
no more weight than the particular path that takes a shortest path from
source s  to vertex u  and then takes edge ( u , v ).
Exercise 22.5-3 asks you to handle the case in which there is no shortest
path from s  to v .
Page number: 748
▪
Effects of r elaxation on shortest-path estimates
The next group of lemmas describes how shortest-path estimates are
af fected by executing a sequence of relaxation steps on the edges of a
weighted, directed graph that has been initialized by I NITIALIZE -S INGLE -
S OURCE .
Lemma 22.1 1 (Upper-bound property)
Let G  = ( V , E ) be a weighted, directed graph with weight function w  : E  →
ℝ . Let s  ∈  V  be the source vertex, and let the graph be initialized by
I NITIALIZE -S INGLE -S OURCE ( G , s ). Then, v .d  ≥ δ( s , v ) for all v  ∈  V , and this
invariant is maintained over any sequence of relaxation steps on the edges
of G . Moreover , once v .d  achieves its lower bound δ( s , v ), it never changes.
Proof    W e prove the invariant v .d  ≥ δ( s , v ) for all vertices v  ∈  V  by
induction over the number of relaxation steps.
For the base case, v .d  ≥ δ( s , v ) holds after initialization, since if v .d  = ∞,
then v .d  ≥ δ( s , v ) for all v  ∈  V  − { s }, and since s.d  = 0 ≥ δ( s , s ). (Note that
δ( s , s ) = −∞ if s  is on a negative-weight cycle and that δ( s , s ) = 0
otherwise.)
For the inductive step, consider the relaxation of an edge ( u , v ). By the
inductive hypothesis, x.d  ≥ δ( s , x ) for all x  ∈  V  prior to the relaxation. The
only d  value that may change is v .d . If it changes, we have
v .d = u.d  + w ( u , v )
≥ δ( s , u ) + w ( u , v ) (by the inductive hypothesis)
≥ δ( s , v ) (by the triangle inequality),
and so the invariant is maintained.
The value of v .d  never changes once v .d  = δ( s , v ) because, having
achieved its lower bound, v .d  cannot decrease since we have just shown that
v .d  ≥ δ( s , v ), and it cannot increase because relaxation steps do not increase
d  values.
▪
Corollary 22.12 (No-path property)
Suppose that in a weighted, directed graph G  = ( V , E ) with weight function
w  : E  → ℝ , no path connects a source vertex s  ∈  V  to a given vertex v  ∈  V .
Page number: 749
Then, after the graph is initialized by I NITIALIZE -S INGLE -S OURCE ( G , s ), we
have v .d  = δ( s , v ) = ∞, and this equation is maintained as an invariant over
any sequence of relaxation steps on the edges of G .
Proof    By the upper -bound property , we always have ∞ = δ( s , v ) ≤ v .d , and
thus v .d  = ∞ = δ( s , v ).
▪
Lemma 22.13
Let G  = ( V , E ) be a weighted, directed graph with weight function w  : E  →
ℝ , and let ( u , v ) ∈  E . Then, immediately after edge ( u , v ) is relaxed by a
call of R ELAX ( u , v , w ), we have v .d  ≤ u.d  + w ( u , v ).
Proof    If, just prior to relaxing edge ( u , v ), we have v .d  > u.d  + w ( u , v ), then
v .d  = u.d  + w ( u , v ) afterward. If, instead, v .d  ≤ u.d  + w ( u , v ) just before the
relaxation, then neither u.d  nor v .d  changes, and so v .d  ≤ u.d  + w ( u , v )
afterward.
▪
Lemma 22.14 (Convergence property)
Let G  = ( V , E ) be a weighted, directed graph with weight function w  : E  →
ℝ , let s  ∈  V  be a source vertex, and let s  ⇝  u  → v  be a shortest path in G
for some vertices u, v  ∈  V . Suppose that G  is initialized by I NITIALIZE -
S INGLE -S OURCE ( G , s ) and then a sequence of relaxation steps that includes
the call R ELAX ( u , v , w ) is executed on the edges of G . If u.d  = δ( s , u ) at any
time prior to the call, then v .d  = δ( s , v ) at all times after the call.
Proof    By the upper -bound property , if u.d  = δ( s , u ) at some point prior to
relaxing edge ( u , v ), then this equation holds thereafter . In particular , after
edge ( u , v ) is relaxed, we have
v .d ≤ u.d  + w ( u , v ) (by Lemma 22.13)
= δ( s , u ) + w ( u , v )
= δ( s , u ) (by Lemma 22.1 on page 606).
The upper -bound property gives v .d  ≥ δ( s , v ), from which we conclude that
v .d  = δ( s , v ), and this equation is maintained thereafter .
▪
Lemma 22.15 (Path-relaxation property)
Page number: 750
Let G  = ( V , E ) be a weighted, directed graph with weight function w  : E  →
ℝ , and let s  ∈  V  be a source vertex. Consider any shortest path p  = 〈 v0 , v1 ,
… , vk〉  from s  = v0  to vk . If G  is initialized by I NITIALIZE -S INGLE -S OURCE ( G ,
s ) and then a sequence of relaxation steps occurs that includes, in order ,
relaxing the edges ( v0 , v1 ), ( v1 , v2 ), … , ( vk −1 , vk ), then vk .d  = δ( s , vk ) after
these relaxations and at all times afterward. This property holds no matter
what other edge relaxations occur , including relaxations that are intermixed
with relaxations of the edges of p .
Proof    W e show by induction that after the i th edge of path p  is relaxed, we
have vi .d  = δ( s , vi ). For the base case, i  = 0, and before any edges of p  have
been relaxed, we have from the initialization that v0 . d  = s.d  = 0 = δ( s , s ). By
the upper -bound property , the value of s.d  never changes after initialization.
For the inductive step, assume that vi −1 . d  = δ( s , vi −1 ). What happens
when edge ( vi −1 , vi ) is relaxed? By the conver gence property , after this
relaxation, we have vi .d  = δ( s , vi ), and this equation is maintained at all
times thereafter .
▪
Relaxation and shortest-paths tr ees
W e now show that once a sequence of relaxations has caused the shortest-
path estimates to conver ge to shortest-path weights, the predecessor
subgraph Gπ  induced by the resulting π values is a shortest-paths tree for G .
W e start with the following lemma, which shows that the predecessor
subgraph always forms a rooted tree whose root is the source.
Lemma 22.16
Let G  = ( V , E ) be a weighted, directed graph with weight function w  : E  →
ℝ  let s  ∈  V  be a source vertex, and assume that G  contains no negative-
weight cycles that are reachable from s . Then, after the graph is initialized
by I NITIALIZE -S INGLE -S OURCE ( G , s ), the predecessor subgraph Gπ  forms a
rooted tree with root s , and any sequence of relaxation steps on edges of G
maintains this property as an invariant.
Proof    Initially , the only vertex in Gπ  is the source vertex, and the lemma is
trivially true. Consider a predecessor subgraph Gπ  that arises after a
Page number: 751
sequence of relaxation steps. W e first prove that Gπ  is acyclic. Suppose for
the sake of contradiction that some relaxation step creates a cycle in the
graph Gπ . Let the cycle be c  = 〈 v0 , v1 , … , vk〉 , where vk  = v0 . Then, vi .π =
vi −1  for i  = 1, 2, … , k  and, without loss of generality , assume that relaxing
edge ( vk −1 , vk ) created the cycle in Gπ .
W e claim that all vertices on cycle c  are reachable from the source
vertex s . Why? Each vertex on c  has a non- NIL  predecessor , and so each
vertex on c  was assigned a finite shortest-path estimate when it was
assigned its non- NIL  π value. By the upper -bound property , each vertex on
cycle c  has a finite shortest-path weight, which means that it is reachable
from s .
W e’ll examine the shortest-path estimates on cycle c  immediately before
the call R ELAX ( vk −1 , vk , w ) and show that c  is a negative-weight cycle,
thereby contradicting the assumption that G  contains no negative-weight
cycles that are reachable from the source. Just before the call, we have vi .π
= vi −1  for i  = 1, 2, … , k  − 1. Thus, for i  = 1, 2, … , k  − 1, the last update to
vi .d  was by the assignment vi .d  = vi −1 . d + w ( vi −1 , vi ). If vi −1 . d  changed since
then, it decreased. Therefore, just before the call R ELAX ( vk −1 , vk , w ), we
have
Because vk .π is changed by the call R ELAX ( vk −1 , vk , w ), immediately
beforehand we also have the strict inequality
vk .d  > vk −1 . d  + wvk −1 , vk ):
Summing this strict inequality with the k  − 1 inequalities (22.1 1), we
obtain the sum of the shortest-path estimates around cycle c :
But

Page number: 752
Figur e 22.9  Showing that a simple path in G π  from source vertex s  to vertex v  is unique. If G π
contains two paths p 1  ( s  ⇝  u  ⇝  x  → z  ⇝  v ) and p 2  ( s  ⇝  u  ⇝  y  → z  ⇝  v ), where x  ≠ y , then z .π = x
and z .π = y , a contradiction.
since each vertex in the cycle c  appears exactly once in each summation.
This equation implies
Thus, the sum of weights around the cycle c is negative, which provides the
desired contradiction.
W e have now proven that Gπ  is a directed, acyclic graph. T o show that it
forms a rooted tree with root s , it suf fices (see Exercise B.5-2 on page 1 175)
to prove that for each vertex v  ∈  Vπ , there is a unique simple path from s  to
v  in Gπ .
The vertices in Vπ  are those with non- NIL  values, plus s . Exercise 22.5-6
asks you to prove that a path from s  exists to each vertex in Vπ .
T o complete the proof of the lemma, we now show that for any vertex v
∈  Vπ , the graph Gπ  contains at most one simple path from s  to v . Suppose
otherwise. That is, suppose that, as Figure 22.9  illustrates, Gπ  contains two
simple paths from s  to some vertex v : p1 , which we decompose into s  ⇝  u
⇝  x  → z  ⇝  v , and p2 , which we decompose into s  ⇝  u  ⇝  y  → z  ⇝  v , where
x  ≠ y  (though u  could be s  and z  could be v ). But then, z .π = x  and z .π = y ,
which implies the contradiction that x  = y . W e conclude that Gπ  contains a
unique simple path from s  to v , and thus Gπ  forms a rooted tree with root s .
▪
W e can now show that if all vertices have been assigned their true
shortest-path weights after a sequence of relaxation steps, then the
predecessor subgraph Gπ  is a shortest-paths tree.
Lemma 22.17 (Predecessor-subgraph property)
Page number: 753
Let G  = ( V , E ) be a weighted, directed graph with weight function w  : E  →
ℝ , let s  ∈  V  be a source vertex, and assume that G  contains no negative-
weight cycles that are reachable from s . Then, after a call to I NITIALIZE -
S INGLE -S OURCE ( G , s ) followed by any sequence of relaxation steps on
edges of G  that produces v .d  = δ( s , v ) for all v  ∈  V , the predecessor
subgraph Gπ  is a shortest-paths tree rooted at s .
Proof    W e must prove that the three properties of shortest-paths trees given
on page 608 hold for Gπ . T o show the first property , we must show that Vπ
is the set of vertices reachable from s . By definition, a shortest-path weight
δ( s , v ) is finite if and only if v  is reachable from s , and thus the vertices that
are reachable from s  are exactly those with finite d  values. But a vertex v  ∈
V  − { s } has been assigned a finite value for v .d  if and only if v .π ≠ NIL , since
both assignments occur in R ELAX . Thus, the vertices in Vπ  are exactly those
reachable from s .
The second property , that Gπ  forms a rooted tree with root s , follows
directly from Lemma 22.16.
It remains, therefore, to prove the last property of shortest-paths trees:
for each vertex v  ∈  Vπ , the unique simple path 
  in Gπ  is a shortest path
from s  to v  in G . Let p  = 〈 v0 , v1 , … , vk〉 , where v0  = s  and vk  = v . Consider
an edge ( vi −1 , vi ) in path p . Because this edge belongs to Gπ , the last
relaxation that changed vi .d  must have been of this edge. After that
relaxation, we had vi .d  = vi −1 . d  + ( vi −1 , vi ). Subsequently , an edge entering
vi −1  could have been relaxed, causing vi −1 . d  to decrease further , but without
changing vi .d . Therefore, we have vi .d  ≥ vi −1 . d  + w ( vi −1 , vi ). Thus, for i  = 1,
2, … , k , we have both vi .d  = δ( s , vi ) and vi .d  ≥ vi −1 . d  + w ( vi −1 , vi ), which
together imply w ( vi −1 , vi ) ≤ δ( s , vi ) − δ( s , vi −1 ). Summing the weights along
path p  yields

Page number: 754
Thus, we have w ( p ) ≤ δ( s , vk ). Since δ( s , vk ) is a lower bound on the weight
of any path from s  to vk , we conclude that w ( p ) = δ( s , vk ), and p  is a shortest
path from s  to v  = vk .
▪
Exer cises
22.5-1
Give two shortest-paths trees for the directed graph of Figure 22.2  on page
609 other than the two shown.
22.5-2
Give an example of a weighted, directed graph G  = ( V , E ) with weight
function w  : E  → ℝ  and source vertex s  such that G  satisfies the following
property: For every edge ( u , v ) ∈  E , there is a shortest-paths tree rooted at s
that contains ( u , v ) and another shortest-paths tree rooted at s  that does not
contain ( u , v ).
22.5-3
Modify the proof of Lemma 22.10 to handle cases in which shortest-path
weights are ∞ or −∞.
22.5-4
Let G  = ( V , E ) be a weighted, directed graph with source vertex s , and let G
be initialized by I NITIALIZE -S INGLE -S OURCE ( G , s ). Prove that if a sequence
of relaxation steps sets s .π to a non- NIL  value, then G  contains a negative-
weight cycle.
22.5-5
Let G  = ( V , E ) be a weighted, directed graph with no negative-weight
edges. Let s  ∈  V  be the source vertex, and suppose that v .π is allowed to be
the predecessor of v  on any  shortest path to v  from source s  if v  ∈  V  − { s } is
reachable from s , and NIL  otherwise. Give an example of such a graph G
and an assignment of π values that produces a cycle in Gπ . (By Lemma
22.16, such an assignment cannot be produced by a sequence of relaxation
steps.)
22.5-6
Page number: 755
Let G  = ( V , E ) be a weighted, directed graph with weight function w  : E  →
ℝ  and no negative-weight cycles. Let s  ∈  V  be the source vertex, and let G
be initialized by I NITIALIZE -S INGLE -S OURCE ( G , s ). Use induction to prove
that for every vertex v  ∈  Vπ , there exists a path from s  to v  in Gπ  and that
this property is maintained as an invariant over any sequence of relaxations.
22.5-7
Let G  = ( V , E ) be a weighted, directed graph that contains no negative-
weight cycles. Let s  ∈  V  be the source vertex, and let G  be initialized by
I NITIALIZE S INGLE -S OURCE ( G , s ). Prove that there exists a sequence of | V | − 1
relaxation steps that produces v .d  = δ( s , v ) for all v  ∈  V .
22.5-8
Let G  be an arbitrary weighted, directed graph with a negative-weight cycle
reachable from the source vertex s. Show how to construct an infinite
sequence of relaxations of the edges of G  such that every relaxation causes
a shortest-path estimate to change.
Pr oblems
22-1     Y en’ s improvement to Bellman-Ford
The Bellman-Ford algorithm does not specify the order in which to relax
edges in each pass. Consider the following method for deciding upon the
order . Before the first pass, assign an arbitrary linear order v1 , v2 , … , v| V |  to
the vertices of the input graph G  = ( V , E ). Then partition the edge set E  into
Ef  ∪  Eb , where Ef  = {( vi , vj ) ∈  E  : i  < j } and Eb  = {( vi , vj ) ∈  E  : i  > j }.
(Assume that G  contains no self-loops, so that every edge belongs to either
Ef  or Eb .) Define Gf  = ( V , Ef ) and Gb  = ( V , Eb ).
a.  Prove that Gf  is acyclic with topological sort 〈 v1 , v2 , … , v| V |〉  and that Gb
is acyclic with topological sort 〈 v| V | , v| V |−1 , … , v1〉 .
Suppose that each pass of the Bellman-Ford algorithm relaxes edges in the
following way . First, visit each vertex in the order v1 , v2 , … , v| V | , relaxing
edges of Ef  that leave the vertex. Then visit each vertex in the order v| V | , v| V |
−1 , …, v1 , relaxing edges of Eb  that leave the vertex.
Page number: 756
b.  Prove that with this scheme, if G  contains no negative-weight cycles that
are reachable from the source vertex s , then after only ⌈ | V | / 2 ⌉  passes over
the edges, v .d  = δ( s , v ) for all vertices v  ∈  V .
c.  Does this scheme improve the asymptotic running time of the Bellman-
Ford algorithm?
22-2     Nesting boxes
A d -dimensional box with dimensions ( x1 , x2 , … , xd ) nests  within another
box with dimensions ( y1 , y2 , … , yd ) if there exists a permutation π on {1, 2,
… , d } such that xπ(1)  < y1 , xπ(2)  < y2 , … , xπ( d )  < yd .
a.  Ar gue that the nesting relation is transitive.
b.  Describe an ef ficient method to determine whether one d -dimensional
box nests inside another .
c.  Y ou are given a set of n d -dimensional boxes { B1 , B2 , … , Bn }. Give an
ef ficient algorithm to find the longest sequence 
  of boxes
such that 
  nests within 
  for j  = 1, 2, … , k  − 1. Express the running
time of your algorithm in terms of n  and d .
22-3     Arbitrage
Arbitrage  is the use of discrepancies in currency exchange rates to
transform one unit of a currency into more than one unit of the same
currency . For example, suppose that one U.S. dollar buys 64 Indian rupees,
one Indian rupee buys 1:8 Japanese yen, and one Japanese yen buys 0:009
U.S. dollars. Then, by converting currencies, a trader can start with 1 U.S.
dollar and buy 64 × 1.8 × 0.009 = 1.0368 U.S. dollars, thus turning a profit
of 3.68%.
Suppose that you are given n  currencies c1 , c2 , … , cn  and an n  × n  table
R  of exchange rates, such that 1 unit of currency ci  buys R [ i , j ] units of
currency cj .
a.  Give an ef ficient algorithm to determine whether there exists a sequence
of currencies 
  such that
R [ i1 , i2 ] · R [ i2 , i3 ] … R [ ik −1 , ik ] · R [ ik , i1 ] > 1.
Page number: 757
Analyze the running time of your algorithm.
b.  Give an ef ficient algorithm to print out such a sequence if one exists.
Analyze the running time of your algorithm.
22-4     Gabow’ s scaling algorithm for single-source shortest paths
A scaling  algorithm solves a problem by initially considering only the
highest-order bit of each relevant input value, such as an edge weight,
assuming that these values are nonnegative integers. The algorithm then
refines the initial solution by looking at the two highest-order bits. It
progressively looks at more and more high-order bits, refining the solution
each time, until it has examined all bits and computed the correct solution.
This problem examines an algorithm for computing the shortest paths
from a single source by scaling edge weights. The input is a directed graph
G  = ( V , E ) with nonnegative integer edge weights w . Let W  = max { w ( u , v ) :
( u , v ) = E } be the maximum weight of any edge. In this problem, you will
develop an algorithm that runs in O ( E  lg W ) time. Assume that all vertices
are reachable from the source.
The scaling algorithm uncovers the bits in the binary representation of
the edge weights one at a time, from the most significant bit to the least
significant bit. Specifically , let k  = ⌈ lg( W  + 1) ⌉  be the number of bits in the
binary representation of W , and for i  = 1, 2, … , k , let wi ( u , v ) = ⌊ w ( u , v )/2k –
i⌋ . That is, wi  ( u , v ) is the “scaled-down” version of w ( u , v ) given by the i
most significant bits of w ( u , v ). (Thus, wk ( u , v ) = w ( u , v ) for all ( u , v ) ∈  E .)
For example, if k  = 5 and w ( u , v ) = 25, which has the binary representation
〈 1 1001 〉 , then w3 ( u , v ) = 〈 1 10〉  = 6. Also with k  = 5, if w ( u , v ) = 〈 00100 〉  = 4,
then w4 ( u , v ) = 〈 0010 〉  = 2. Define δi ( u , v ) as the shortest-path weight from
vertex u  to vertex v  using weight function wi , so that δk ( u , v ) = δ( u , v ) for all
u , v  ∈  V . For a given source vertex s , the scaling algorithm first computes
the shortest-path weights δ1 ( s , v ) for all v  ∈  V , then computes δ2 ( s , v ) for all
v  ∈  V , and so on, until it computes δk ( s , v ) for all v  ∈  V . Assume
throughout that | E | ≥ | V | − 1. Y ou will show how to compute δi  from δi −1  in
O ( E ) time, so that the entire algorithm takes O ( kE ) = O ( E  lg W ) time.
a.  Suppose that for all vertices v  ∈  V , we have δ( s , v ) ≤ | E |. Show how to
compute δ( s , v ) for all v  ∈  V  in O ( E ) time.
Page number: 758
b.  Show how to compute δ1 ( s , v ) for all v  ∈  V  in O ( E ) time.
Now focus on computing δi  from δi −1 .
c.  Prove that for i  = 2, 3, … , k , either wi ( u , v ) = 2 wi −1 ( u , v ) or wi ( u , v ) =
2 wi −1 ( u , v ) + 1. Then prove that
2δi −1 ( s , v ) ≤ δi ( s , v ) ≤ 2δi −1 ( s , v ) + | V | − 1
for all v  ∈  V .
d.  Define, for i  = 2, 3, … , k  and all ( u , v ) ∈  E ,
ŵi ( u , v ) = wi ( u , v ) + 2δi −1 ( s , u ) − 2δi −1 ( s , v ).
Prove that for i  = 2, 3, … , k  and all u , v  ∈  V , the “reweighted” value
ŵi ( u , v ) of edge ( u , v ) is a nonnegative integer .
e.  Now define 
  as the shortest-path weight from s  to v  using the weight
function ŵi . Prove that for i  = 2, 3, … , k  and all v  ∈  V ,
and that 
 .
f.  Show how to compute δi ( s , v ) from δi −1 ( s , v ) for all v  ∈  V  in O ( E ) time.
Conclude that you can compute δ( s , v ) for all v  ∈  V  in O ( E  lg W ) time.
22-5     Karp’ s minimum mean-weight cycle algorithm
Let G  = ( V , E ) be a directed graph with weight function w  : E  → ℝ , and let
n  = | V |. W e define the mean weight  of a cycle c  = 〈 e1 , e2 , … , ek〉  of edges in
E  to be
Let μ* = min {μ( c ) : c  is a directed cycle in G }. W e call a cycle c  for which
μ( c ) = μ* a minimum mean-weight cycle . This problem investigates an
ef ficient algorithm for computing μ*.
Page number: 759
Assume without loss of generality that every vertex v  ∈  V  is reachable
from a source vertex s  ∈  V . Let δ( s , v ) be the weight of a shortest path from
s  to v , and let δk ( s , v ) be the weight of a shortest path from s  to v  consisting
of exactly k  edges. If there is no path from s  to v  with exactly k  edges, then
δk ( s , v ) = ∞.
a.  Show that if μ* = 0, then G  contains no negative-weight cycles and δ( s ,
v ) = min {δk ( s , v ) : 0 ≤ k  ≤ n  − 1} for all vertices v  ∈  V .
b.  Show that if μ* = 0, then
for all vertices v  ∈  V . ( Hint:  Use both properties from part (a).)
c.  Let c  be a 0-weight cycle, and let u  and v  be any two vertices on c .
Suppose that μ* = 0 and that the weight of the simple path from u  to v
along the cycle is x . Prove that δ( s , v ) = δ( s , u ) + x . ( Hint:  The weight of
the simple path from v  to u  along the cycle is − x .)
d.  Show that if μ* = 0, then on each minimum mean-weight cycle there
exists a vertex v  such that
( Hint:  Show how to extend a shortest path to any vertex on a minimum
mean-weight cycle along the cycle to make a shortest path to the next
vertex on the cycle.)
e.  Show that if μ* = 0, then the minimum value of
taken over all vertices v  ∈  V , equals 0.
f.  Show that if you add a constant t  to the weight of each edge of G , then μ*
increases by t . Use this fact to show that μ* equals the minimum value of

Page number: 760
taken over all vertices v  ∈  V .
g.  Give an O ( VE )-time algorithm to compute μ*.
22-6     Bitonic shortest paths
A sequence is bitonic  if it monotonically increases and then monotonically
decreases, or if by a circular shift it monotonically increases and then
monotonically decreases. For example the sequences 〈 1, 4, 6, 8, 3, −2 〉 , 〈 9,
2, −4, −10, −5 〉 , and 〈 1, 2, 3, 4 〉  are bitonic, but 〈 1, 3, 12, 4, 2, 10 〉  is not
bitonic. (See Problem 14-3 on page 407 for the bitonic euclidean traveling-
salesperson problem.)
Suppose that you are given a directed graph G  = ( V , E ) with weight
function w  : E  → ℝ , where all edge weights are unique, and you wish to
find single-source shortest paths from a source vertex s . Y ou are given one
additional piece of information: for each vertex v  ∈  V , the weights of the
edges along any shortest path from s  to v  form a bitonic sequence.
Give the most ef ficient algorithm you can to solve this problem, and
analyze its running time.
Chapter notes
The shortest-path problem has a long history that is nicely desribed in an
article by Schrijver [ 400 ]. He credits the general idea of repeatedly
executing edge relaxations to Ford [ 148 ]. Dijkstra’ s algorithm [ 1 16 ]
appeared in 1959, but it contained no mention of a priority queue. The
Bellman-Ford algorithm is based on separate algorithms by Bellman [ 45 ]
and Ford [ 149 ]. The same algorithm is also attributed to Moore [ 334 ].
Bellman describes the relation of shortest paths to dif ference constraints.
Lawler [ 276 ] describes the linear -time algorithm for shortest paths in a dag,
which he considers part of the folklore.
When edge weights are relatively small nonnegative integers, more
ef ficient algorithms result from using min-priority queues that require
integer keys and rely on the sequence of values returned by the E XTRACT -
M IN  calls in Dijkstra’ s algorithm monotonically increasing over time.
Ahuja, Mehlhorn, Orlin, and T arjan [ 8 ] give an algorithm that runs in 
 time on graphs with nonnegative edge weights, where W  is the
lar gest weight of any edge in the graph. The best bounds are by Thorup
Page number: 761
[ 436 ], who gives an algorithm that runs in O ( E  lg lg V ) time, and by Raman
[ 375 ], who gives an algorithm that runs in O ( E  + V  min {(lg V )1/3+ε, (lg
W )1/4+ε}) time. These two algorithms use an amount of space that depends
on the word size of the underlying machine. Although the amount of space
used can be unbounded in the size of the input, it can be reduced to be
linear in the size of the input using randomized hashing.
For undirected graphs with integer weights, Thorup [ 435 ] gives an
algorithm that runs in O ( V  + E ) time for single-source shortest paths. In
contrast to the algorithms mentioned in the previous paragraph, the
sequence of values returned by E XTRACT -M IN  calls does not monotonically
increase over time, and so this algorithm is not an implementation of
Dijkstra’ s algorithm. Pettie and Ramachandran [ 357 ] remove the restriction
of integer weights on undirected graphs. Their algorithm entails a
preprocessing phase, followed by queries for specific source vertices.
Preprocessing takes O ( MST ( V , E ) + min { V  lg V , V  lg lg r}) time, where
MST ( V , E ) is the time to compute a minimum spanning tree and r  is the
ratio of the maximum edge weight to the minimum edge weight. After
preprocessing, each query takes 
  time, where 
  is the
inverse of Ackermann’ s function. (See the chapter notes for Chapter 19  for
a brief discussion of Ackermann’ s function and its inverse.)
For graphs with negative edge weights, an algorithm due to Gabow and
T arjan [ 167 ] runs in 
  time, and one by Goldber g [ 186 ] runs in 
 time, where W  = max {| w ( u , v )| : ( u , v ) ∈  E }. There has also
been some progress based on methods that use continuous optimization and
electrical flows. Cohen et al. [ 98 ] give such an algorithm, which is
randomized and runs in Õ ( E10/7 lg W ) expected time (see Problem 3-6 on
page 73 for the defintion of Õ -notation). There is also a pseudopolyomial-
time algorithm based on fast matrix multiplication. Sankowski [ 394 ] and
Y uster and Zwick [ 465 ] designed an algorithm for shortest paths that runs in
Õ ( W Vω) time, where two n  × n  matrices can be multiplied in O ( nω) time,
giving a faster algorithm than the previously mentioned algorithms for
small values of W  on dense graphs.
Cherkassky , Goldber g, and Radzik [ 89 ] conducted extensive
experiments comparing various shortest-path algorithms. Shortest-path
algorithms are widely used in real-time navigation and route-planning
applications. T ypically based on Dijkstra’ s algorithm, these algorithms use
many clever ideas to be able to compute shortest paths on networks with
Page number: 762
many millions of vertices and edges in fractions of a second. Bast et al. [ 36 ]
survey many of these developments.
1 It may seem strange that the term “relaxation” is used for an operation that tightens an upper
bound. The use of the term is historical. The outcome of a relaxation step can be viewed as a
relaxation of the constraint v .d  ≤ u.d  + w ( u , v ), which, by the triangle inequality (Lemma 22.10 on
page 633), must be satisfied if u.d  = δ( s , u ) and v .d  = δ( s , v ). That is, if v .d  ≤ u.d  + w ( u , v ), there is no
“pressure” to satisfy this constraint, so the constraint is “relaxed.”
2 “PER T” is an acronym for “program evaluation and review technique.”
Page number: 763
23        All-Pairs Shortest Paths
In this chapter , we turn to the problem of finding shortest paths between all
pairs of vertices in a graph. A classic application of this problem occurs in
computing a table of distances between all pairs of cities for a road atlas.
Classic perhaps, but not a true application of finding shortest paths between
all  pairs of vertices. After all, a road map modeled as a graph has one vertex
for every  road intersection and one edge wherever a road connects
intersections. A table of intercity distances in an atlas might include
distances for 100 cities, but the United States has approximately 300,000
signal-controlled intersections1 and many more uncontrolled intersections.
A legitimate application of all-pairs shortest paths is to determine the
diameter  of a network: the longest of all shortest paths. If a directed graph
models a communication network, with the weight of an edge indicating the
time required for a message to traverse a communication link, then the
diameter gives the longest possible transit time for a message in the
network.
As in Chapter 22 , the input is a weighted, directed graph G  = ( V , E ) with
a weight function w  : E  → ℝ  that maps edges to real-valued weights. Now
the goal is to find, for every pair of vertices u, v  ∈  V , a shortest (least-
weight) path from u  to v , where the weight of a path is the sum of the
weights of its constituent edges. For the all-pairs problem, the output
typically takes a tabular form in which the entry in u ’ s row and v ’ s column
is the weight of a shortest path from u  to v .
Y ou can solve an all-pairs shortest-paths problem by running a single-
source shortest-paths algorithm | V | times, once with each vertex as the
source. If all edge weights are nonnegative, you can use Dijkstra’ s
algorithm. If you implement the min-priority queue with a linear array , the
Page number: 764
running time is O ( V3 + VE ) which is O ( V3). The binary min-heap
implementation of the min-priority queue yields a running time of O ( V ( V  +
E ) lg V ). If | E | = Ω( V ), the running time becomes O ( VE  lg V ), which is
faster than O ( V3) if the graph is sparse. Alternatively , you can implement
the min-priority queue with a Fibonacci heap, yielding a running time of
O ( V2 lg V  + VE ).
If the graph contains negative-weight edges, Dijkstra’ s algorithm doesn’ t
work, but you can run the slower Bellman-Ford algorithm once from each
vertex. The resulting running time is O ( V2E ), which on a dense graph is
O ( V4). This chapter shows how to guarantee a much better asymptotic
running time. It also investigates the relation of the all-pairs shortest-paths
problem to matrix multiplication.
Unlike the single-source algorithms, which assume an adjacency-list
representation of the graph, most of the algorithms in this chapter represent
the graph by an adjacency matrix. (Johnson’ s algorithm for sparse graphs,
in Section 23.3 , uses adjacency lists.) For convenience, we assume that the
vertices are numbered 1, 2, … , | V |, so that the input is an n  × n  matrix W  =
( wij ) representing the edge weights of an n -vertex directed graph G  = ( V , E ),
where
The graph may contain negative-weight edges, but we assume for the time
being that the input graph contains no negative-weight cycles.
The tabular output of each of the all-pairs shortest-paths algorithms
presented in this chapter is an n  × n  matrix. The ( i , j ) entry of the output
matrix contains δ( i , j), the shortest-path weight fr om vertex i  to vertex j , as
in Chapter 22 .
A full solution to the all-pairs shortest-paths problem includes not only
the shortest-path weights but also a predecessor matrix  Π = (πij ), where πij
is NIL  if either i  = j  or there is no path from i  to j , and otherwise πij  is the
predecessor of j  on some shortest path from i . Just as the predecessor
subgraph Gπ  from Chapter 22  is a shortest-paths tree for a given source
vertex, the subgraph induced by the i th row of the Π matrix should be a
Page number: 765
shortest-paths tree with root i . For each vertex i  ∈  V , the predecessor
subgraph  of G  for i  is Gπ, i  = ( Vπ, i , Eπ, i ), where
V π, i = { j  ∈  V  : π ij  ≠ NIL } ∪  { i },
E π, i = {(π ij , j ) : j  ∈  V π, i  − { i }}.
If Gπ, i  is a shortest-paths tree, then P RINT -A LL -P AIRS -S HOR TEST -P A TH  on the
following page, which is a modified version of the P RINT -P A TH  procedure
from Chapter 20 , prints a shortest path from vertex i  to vertex j .
In order to highlight the essential features of the all-pairs algorithms in
this chapter , we won’ t cover how to compute predecessor matrices and their
properties as extensively as we dealt with predecessor subgraphs in Chapter
22 . Some of the exercises cover the basics.
P RINT -A LL -P AIRS -S HOR TEST -P A TH (Π, i , j )
1 if  i  == j
2 print i
3 elseif  π ij  == NIL
4 print “no path from” i  “to” j  “exists”
5 else  P RINT -A LL -P AIRS -S HOR TEST -P A TH (Π, i , π ij )
6 print j
Chapter outline
Section 23.1  presents a dynamic-programming algorithm based on matrix
multiplication to solve the all-pairs shortest-paths problem. The technique
of “repeated squaring” yields a running time of Θ( V3 lg V ). Section 23.2
gives another dynamic-programming algorithm, the Floyd-W arshall
algorithm, which runs in Θ( V3) time. Section 23.2  also covers the problem
of finding the transitive closure of a directed graph, which is related to the
all-pairs shortest-paths problem. Finally , Section 23.3  presents Johnson’ s
algorithm, which solves the all-pairs shortest-paths problem in O ( V2 lg V  +
VE ) time and is a good choice for lar ge, sparse graphs.
Before proceeding, we need to establish some conventions for
adjacency-matrix representations. First, we generally assume that the input
graph G  = ( V , E ) has n  vertices, so that n  = | V |. Second, we use the
convention of denoting matrices by uppercase letters, such as W , L , or D ,
and their individual elements by subscripted lowercase letters, such as  wij ,
Page number: 766
lij , or dij . Finally , some matrices have parenthesized superscripts, as in 
 or 
 , to indicate iterates.
23.1    Shortest paths and matrix multiplication
This section presents a dynamic-programming algorithm for the all-pairs
shortest-paths problem on a directed graph G  = ( V , E ). Each major loop of
the dynamic program invokes an operation similar to matrix multiplication,
so that the algorithm looks like repeated matrix multiplication. W e’ll start
by developing a Θ( V4)-time algorithm for the all-pairs shortest-paths
problem, and then we’ll improve its running time to Θ( V3 lg V ).
Before proceeding, let’ s briefly recap the steps given in Chapter 14  for
developing a dynamic-programming algorithm:
1 . Characterize the structure of an optimal solution.
2 . Recursively define the value of an optimal solution.
3 . Compute the value of an optimal solution in a bottom-up fashion.
W e reserve the fourth step—constructing an optimal solution from
computed information—for the exercises.
The structur e of a shortest path
Let’ s start by characterizing the structure of an optimal solution. Lemma
22.1 tells us that all subpaths of a shortest path are shortest paths. Consider
a shortest path p  from vertex i  to vertex j , and suppose that p  contains at
most r  edges. Assuming that there are no negative-weight cycles, r  is finite.
If i = j , then p  has weight 0 and no edges. If vertices i  and j  are distinct,
then decompose path p  into 
 , where path p ′ now contains at most r
− 1 edges. Lemma 22.1 says that p ′ is a shortest path from i  to k , and so δ( i ,
j ) = δ( i , k ) + wkj .
A r ecursive solution to the all-pairs shortest-paths pr oblem
Now , let 
  be the minimum weight of any path from vertex i  to vertex j  that
contains at most r  edges. When r  = 0, there is a shortest path from i  to j  with
no edges if and only if i  = j , yielding
Page number: 767
For r  ≥ 1, one way to achieve a minimum-weight path from i  to j  with at
most r  edges is by taking a path containing at most r  − 1 edges, so that 
. Another way is by taking a path of at most r  − 1 edges from i  to
some vertex k  and then taking the edge ( k , j ), so that 
 .
Therefore, to examine paths from i  to j  consisting of at most r  edges, try all
possible predecessors k  of j , giving the recursive definition
The last equality follows from the observation that wjj  = 0 for all j .
What are the actual shortest-path weights δ( i , j )? If the graph contains no
negative-weight cycles, then whenever δ( i , j ) < ∞, there is a shortest path
from vertex i  to vertex j  that is simple. (A path p  from i  to j  that is not
simple contains a cycle. Since each cycle’ s weight is nonnegative, removing
all cycles from the path leaves a simple path with weight no greater than p ’ s
weight.) Because any simple path contains at most n  − 1 edges, a path from
vertex i  to vertex j  with more than n  − 1 edges cannot have lower weight
than a shortest path from i  to j . The actual shortest-path weights are
therefore given by
Computing the shortest-path weights bottom up
T aking as input the matrix W  = ( wij ), let’ s see how to compute a series of
matrices L(0), L(1), … , L( n −1), where 
  for r  = 0, 1, … , n  − 1. The
initial matrix is L(0) given by equation (23.2). The final matrix L( n −1)
contains the actual shortest-path weights.
The heart of the algorithm is the procedure E XTEND -S HOR TEST -P A THS ,
which implements equation (23.3) for all i  and j . The four inputs are the
matrix L( r −1) computed so far; the edge-weight matrix W ; the output matrix
L( r ), which will hold the computed result and whose elements are all
initialized to ∞ before invoking the procedure; and the number n  of vertices.
The superscripts r  and r  − 1 help to make the correspondence of the
Page number: 768
pseudocode with equation (23.3) plain, but they play no actual role in the
pseudocode. The procedure extends the shortest paths computed so far by
one more edge, producing the matrix L( r ) of shortest-path weights from the
matrix L( r −1) computed so far . Its running time is Θ( n3) due to the three
nested for  loops.
E XTEND -S HOR TEST -P A THS ( L( r −1), W , L( r ), n )
1// Assume that the elements of L( r ) are initialized to ∞.
2 for  i  = 1 to  n
3 for  j  = 1 to  n
4 for  k  = 1 to  n
5
Let’ s now understand the relation of this computation to matrix
multiplication. Consider how to compute the matrix product C  = A  · B  of
two n  × n  matrices A  and B . The straightforward method used by M A TRIX -
M UL TIPL Y  on page 81 uses a triply nested loop to implement equation (4.1),
which we repeat here for convenience:
for i , j  = 1, 2, … , n . Now make the substitutions
l( r −1)  → a ,
w  → b ,
l( r )  → c ,
min  → +,
+  → .
in equation (23.3). Y ou get equation (23.5)! Making these changes to
E XTEND -S HOR TEST -P A THS , and also replacing ∞ (the identity for min) by 0
(the identity for +), yields the procedure M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y . W e can see that
the procedure E XTEND -S HOR TEST -P A THS ( L( r −1), W , L( r ), n ) computes the
matrix “product” L( r ) = L( r −1). W  using this unusual definition of matrix
multiplication.2
Thus, we can solve the all-pairs shortest-paths problem by repeatedly
multiplying matrices. Each step extends the shortest-path weights computed
so far by one more edge using E XTEND -S HOR TEST -P A THS ( L( r −1), W , L( r ), n ) to
Page number: 769
perform the matrix multiplication. Starting with the matrix L(0), we produce
the following sequence of n  − 1 matrices corresponding to powers of W :
L(1) =L(0) · W=W1,
L(2) =L(1) · W=W2,
L(3) =L(2) · W=W3,
⋮
L( n −1) =L( n −2) · W=Wn −1.
At the end, the matrix L( n −1) = Wn −1 contains the shortest-path weights.
The procedure S LOW -APSP on the next page computes this sequence in
Θ( n4) time. The procedure takes the n  × n  matrices W  and L(0) as inputs,
along with n . Figure 23.1  illustrates its operation. The pseudocode uses two
n  × n  matrices L  and M  to store powers of W , computing M  = L  · W  on each
iteration. Line 2 initializes L  = L(0). For each iteration r , line 4 initializes M
= ∞, where ∞ in this context is a matrix of scalar ∞ values. The r th iteration
starts with the invariant L  = L( r −1) = Wr −1. Line 6 computes M  = L  · W  =
L( r −1) · W  = Wr −1 · W  = Wr = L( r ) so that the invariant can be restored for the
next iteration by line 7, which sets L  = M . At the end, the matrix L  = L( n −1)
= Wn −1 of shortest-path weights is returned. The assignments to n  × n
matrices in lines 2, 4, and 7 implicitly run doubly nested loops that take
Θ( n2) time for each assignment. The n  − 1 invocations of E XTEND -
S HOR TEST -P A THS , each of which takes Θ( n3) time, dominate the
computation, yielding a total running time of Θ( n4).
Figur e 23.1  A directed graph and the sequence of matrices L( r ) computed by S LOW -APSP . Y ou
might want to verify that L(5), defined as L(4) · W , equals L(4), and thus L( r ) = L(4) for all r  ≥ 4.
Page number: 770
S LOW -APSP( W , L(0), n )
1 let L  = ( l ij ) and M  = ( m ij ) be new n  × n  matrices
2L  = L(0)
3 for  r  = 1 to  n  − 1
4 M  = ∞       // initialize M
5 // Compute the matrix “product” M  = L  · W .
6 E XTEND -S HOR TEST -P A THS ( L , W , M , n )
7 L  = M
8 r eturn  L
Impr oving the running time
Bear in mind that the goal is not to compute all  the L( r ) matrices: only the
matrix L( n −1) matters. Recall that in the absence of negative-weight cycles,
equation (23.4) implies L( r ) = L( n −1) for all integers r  ≥ n  − 1. Just as
traditional matrix multiplication is associative, so is matrix multiplication
defined by the E XTEND -S HOR TEST -P A THS  procedure (see Exercise 23.1-4). In
fact, we can compute L( n −1) with only ⌈ lg( n  – 1) ⌉  matrix products by using
the technique of repeated squaring :
Since 2⌈ lg( n  – 1) ⌉ ≥ n  – 1, the final product is 
 .
The procedure F ASTER -APSP implements this idea. It takes just the n  × n
matrix W  and the size n  as inputs. Each iteration of the while  loop of lines
4–8 starts with the invariant L  = Wr, which it squares using E XTEND -
S HOR TEST -P A THS  to obtain the matrix M  = L2 = ( Wr)2 = W2 r. At the end of
each iteration, the value of r  doubles, and L  for the next iteration becomes
M , restoring the invariant. Upon exiting the loop when r  ≥ n  − 1, the
procedure returns L  = Wr = L( r ) = L( n −1) by equation (23.4). As in S LOW -
APSP , the assignments to n  × n  matrices in lines 2, 5, and 8 implicitly run
doubly nested loops, taking Θ( n2) time for each assignment.
F ASTER -APSP( W , n )
1 let L  and M  be new n  × n  matrices
Page number: 771
2 L  = W
3 r  = 1
4 while  r  < n  − 1
5 M  = ∞ // initialize M
6 E XTEND -S HOR TEST -P A THS ( L , L , M , n )// compute M  = L2
7 r  = 2 r
8 L  = M // ready for the next iteration
9 r eturn  L
Because each of the ⌈ lg( n  – 1) ⌉  matrix products takes Θ( n3) time,
F ASTER -APSP runs in Θ( n3 lg n ) time. The code is tight, containing no
elaborate data structures, and the constant hidden in the Θ-notation is
therefore small.
Exer cises
23.1-1
Run S LOW -APSP on the weighted, directed graph of Figure 23.2 , showing
the matrices that result for each iteration of the loop. Then do the same for
F ASTER -APSP .
Figur e 23.2  A weighted, directed graph for use in Exercises 23.1-1, 23.2-1, and 23.3-1.
23.1-2
Why is it convenient for both S LOW -APSP and F ASTER -APSP that wii  = 0
for i  = 1, 2, … , n ?
23.1-3
What does the matrix

Page number: 772
used in the shortest-paths algorithms correspond to in regular matrix
multiplication?
23.1-4
Show that matrix multiplication defined by E XTEND -S HOR TEST -P A THS  is
associative.
23.1-5
Show how to express the single-source shortest-paths problem as a product
of matrices and a vector . Describe how evaluating this product corresponds
to a Bellman-Ford-like algorithm (see Section 22.1 ).
23.1-6
Ar gue that we don’ t need the matrix M  in S LOW -APSP because by
substituting L  for M  and leaving out the initialization of M , the code still
works correctly . ( Hint:  Relate line 5 of E XTEND -S HOR TEST -P A THS  to R ELAX
on page 610.) Do we need the matrix M  in F ASTER -APSP?
23.1-7
Suppose that you also want to compute the vertices on shortest paths in the
algorithms of this section. Show how to compute the predecessor matrix Π
from the completed matrix L  of shortest-path weights in O ( n3) time.
23.1-8
Y ou can also compute the vertices on shortest paths along with computing
the shortest-path weights. Define 
  as the predecessor of vertex j  on any
minimum-weight path from vertex i  to vertex j  that contains at most r
edges. Modify the E XTEND -S HOR TEST -P A THS  and S LOW -APSP procedures to
compute the matrices Π(1), Π(2), … , Π( n −1) as they compute the matrices
L(1), L(2), … , L( n −1).
23.1-9
Modify F ASTER -APSP so that it can determine whether the graph contains a
negative-weight cycle.
23.1-10
Give an ef ficient algorithm to find the length (number of edges) of a
minimum-length negative-weight cycle in a graph.
Page number: 773
23.2    The Floyd-W arshall algorithm
Having already seen one dynamic-programming solution to the all-pairs
shortest-paths problem, in this section we’ll see another: the Floyd-
W arshall algorithm , which runs in Θ( V3) time. As before, negative-weight
edges may be present, but not negative-weight cycles. As in Section 23.1 ,
we develop the algorithm by following the dynamic-programming process.
After studying the resulting algorithm, we present a similar method for
finding the transitive closure of a directed graph.
The structur e of a shortest path
In the Floyd-W arshall algorithm, we characterize the structure of a shortest
path dif ferently from how we characterized it in Section 23.1 . The Floyd-
W arshall algorithm considers the intermediate vertices of a shortest path,
where an intermediate  vertex of a simple path p  = 〈 v1 , v2 , … , vl〉  is any
vertex of p  other than v1  or vl , that is, any vertex in the set { v2 , v3 , … , vl −1 }.
The Floyd-W arshall algorithm relies on the following observation.
Numbering the vertices of G  by V  = {1, 2, … , n }, take a subset {1, 2, … ,
k } of vertices for some 1 ≤ k  ≤ n . For any pair of vertices i , j  ∈  V , consider
all paths from i  to j  whose intermediate vertices are all drawn from {1, 2, …
, k }, and let p  be a minimum-weight path from among them. (Path p  is
simple.) The Floyd-W arshall algorithm exploits a relationship between path
p  and shortest paths from i  to j  with all intermediate vertices in the set {1, 2,
… , k  − 1}. The details of the relationship depend on whether k  is an
intermediate vertex of path p  or not.
Figur e 23.3  Optimal substructure used by the Floyd-W arshall algorithm. Path p  is a shortest path
from vertex i  to vertex j , and k  is the highest-numbered intermediate vertex of p . Path p 1 , the portion
of path p  from vertex i  to vertex k , has all intermediate vertices in the set {1, 2, … , k  − 1}. The same
holds for path p 2  from vertex k  to vertex j .
Page number: 774
If k  is not an intermediate vertex of path p , then all intermediate
vertices of path p  belong to the set {1, 2, … , k  − 1}. Thus a shortest
path from vertex i  to vertex j  with all intermediate vertices in the set
{1, 2, … , k  − 1} is also a shortest path from i  to j  with all
intermediate vertices in the set {1, 2, … , k }.
If k  is an intermediate vertex of path p , then decompose p  into 
, as Figure 23.3  illustrates. By Lemma 22.1, p1  is a shortest
path from i  to k  with all intermediate vertices in the set {1, 2, … , k }.
In fact, we can make a slightly stronger statement. Because vertex k
is not an intermediate  vertex of path p1 , all intermediate vertices of p1
belong to the set {1, 2, … , k  − 1}. Therefore p1  is a shortest path
from i  to k  with all intermediate vertices in the set {1, 2, … , k  − 1}.
Likewise, p2  is a shortest path from vertex k  to vertex j  with all
intermediate vertices in the set {1, 2, … , k  − 1}.
A r ecursive solution to the all-pairs shortest-paths pr oblem
The above observations suggest a recursive formulation of shortest-path
estimates that dif fers from the one in Section 23.1 . Let 
  be the weight of
a shortest path from vertex i  to vertex j  for which all intermediate vertices
belong to the set {1, 2, … , k }. When k  = 0, a path from vertex i  to vertex j
with no intermediate vertex numbered higher than 0 has no intermediate
vertices at all. Such a path has at most one edge, and hence 
 .
Following the above discussion, define 
  recursively by
Because for any path, all intermediate vertices belong to the set {1, 2, … ,
n }, the matrix 
  gives the final answer: 
  for all i , j  ∈  V .
Computing the shortest-path weights bottom up
Based on recurrence (23.6), the bottom-up procedure F LOYD -W ARSHALL
computes the values 
  in order of increasing values of k . Its input is an n  ×
n  matrix W  defined as in equation (23.1). The procedure returns the matrix
D( n ) of shortest-path weights. Figure 23.4  shows the matrices D( k ) computed
by the Floyd-W arshall algorithm for the graph in Figure 23.1 .
Page number: 775
F LOYD -W ARSHALL ( W , n )
1D(0) = W
2 for  k  = 1 to  n
3let 
  be a new n  × n  matrix
4 for  i  = 1 to  n
5 for  j  = 1 to  n
6
7r eturn  D( n )
The running time of the Floyd-W arshall algorithm is determined by the
triply nested for  loops of lines 2–6. Because each execution of line 6 takes
O (1) time, the algorithm runs in Θ( n3) time. As in the final algorithm in
Section 23.1 , the code is tight, with no elaborate data structures, and so the
constant hidden in the Θ-notation is small. Thus, the Floyd-W arshall
algorithm is quite practical for even moderate-sized input graphs.
Constructing a shortest path
There are a variety of dif ferent methods for constructing shortest paths in
the Floyd-W arshall algorithm. One way is to compute the matrix D  of
shortest-path weights and then construct the predecessor matrix Π from the
D  matrix. Exercise 23.1-7 asks you to implement this method so that it runs
in O ( n3) time. Given the predecessor matrix Π, the P RINT -A LL -P AIRS -
S HOR TEST -P A TH  procedure prints the vertices on a given shortest path.
Alternatively , the predecessor matrix … can be computed while the
algorithm computes the matrices D(0), D(1), … , D( n ). Specifically , compute
a sequence of matrices Π(0), Π(1), … , Π( n ), where Π = Π( n ) and 
  is the
predecessor of vertex j  on a shortest path from vertex i  with all intermediate
vertices in the set {1, 2, … , k }.
Page number: 776
Figur e 23.4  The sequence of matrices D( k ) and Π( k ) computed by the Floyd-W arshall algorithm for
the graph in Figure 23.1 .
Here’ s a recursive formulation of 
 . When k  = 0, a shortest path from i
to j  has no intermediate vertices at all, and so
For k  ≥ 1, if the path has k  as an intermediate vertex, so that it is i  ⇝  k  ⇝  j
where k  ≠ j , then choose as the predecessor of j  on this path the same vertex
as the predecessor of j  chosen on a shortest path from k  with all
intermediate vertices in the set {1, 2, … , k  − 1}. Otherwise, when the path
from i  to j  does not have k  as an intermediate vertex, choose the same
Page number: 777
predecessor of j  as on a shortest path from i  with all intermediate vertices in
the set {1, 2, … , k  − 1}. Formally , for k  ≥ 1,
Exercise 23.2-3 asks you to show how to incorporate the Π( k ) matrix
computations into the F LOYD -W ARSHALL  procedure. Figure 23.4  shows the
sequence of Π( k ) matrices that the resulting algorithm computes for the
graph of Figure 23.1 . The exercise also asks for the more dif ficult task of
proving that the predecessor subgraph Gπ, i  is a shortest-paths tree with root
i . Exercise 23.2-7 asks for yet another way to reconstruct shortest paths.
T ransitive closur e of a dir ected graph
Given a directed graph G  = ( V , E ) with vertex set V  = {1, 2, … , n }, you
might wish to determine simply whether G  contains a path from i  to j  for all
vertex pairs i , j  ∈  V , without regard to edge weights. W e define the
transitive closure  of G  as the graph G * = ( V , E *), where
E * = {( i , j ) : there is a path from vertex i  to vertex j  in G }.
One way to compute the transitive closure of a graph in Θ( n3) time is to
assign a weight of 1 to each edge of E  and run the Floyd-W arshall
algorithm. If there is a path from vertex i  to vertex j , you get dij  < n .
Otherwise, you get dij  = ∞.
There is another , similar way to compute the transitive closure of G  in
Θ( n3) time, which can save time and space in practice. This method
substitutes the logical operations ∨  (logical OR) and ∧  (logical AND) for
the arithmetic operations min and + in the Floyd-W arshall algorithm. For i ,
j , k  = 1, 2, … , n , define 
  to be 1 if there exists a path in graph G  from
vertex i  to vertex j  with all intermediate vertices in the set {1, 2, … , k }, and
0 otherwise. T o construct the transitive closure G * = ( V , E *), put edge ( i , j )
into E * if and only if 
 . A recursive definition of 
 , analogous to
recurrence (23.6), is
Page number: 778
Figur e 23.5  A directed graph and the matrices T( k ) computed by the transitive-closure algorithm.
and for k  ≥ 1,
As in the Floyd-W arshall algorithm, the T RANSITIVE -C LOSURE  procedure
computes the matrices 
  in order of increasing k .
T RANSITIVE -C LOSURE ( G , n )
  1let 
  be a new n  × n  matrix
  2 for  i  = 1 to  n
  3 for  j  = 1 to  n
  4 if  i  == j  or ( i , j ) ∈  G.E
  5
  6else  
  7 for  k  = 1 to  n
  8let 
  be a new n  × n  matrix
  9 for  i  = 1 to  n
10 for  j  = 1 to  n
1 1
12r eturn  T( n )
Figure 23.5  shows the matrices T( k ) computed by the T RANSITIVE -
C LOSURE  procedure on a sample graph. The T RANSITIVE -C LOSURE
procedure, like the Floyd-W arshall algorithm, runs in Θ( n3) time. On some
computers, though, logical operations on single-bit values execute faster
than arithmetic operations on integer words of data. Moreover , because the
Page number: 779
direct transitive-closure algorithm uses only boolean values rather than
integer values, its space requirement is less than the Floyd-W arshall
algorithm’ s by a factor corresponding to the size of a word of computer
storage.
Exer cises
23.2-1
Run the Floyd-W arshall algorithm on the weighted, directed graph of
Figure 23.2 . Show the matrix D( k ) that results for each iteration of the outer
loop.
23.2-2
Show how to compute the transitive closure using the technique of Section
23.1 .
23.2-3
Modify the F LOYD -W ARSHALL  procedure to compute the Π( k ) matrices
according to equations (23.7) and (23.8). Prove rigorously that for all i  ∈  V ,
the predecessor subgraph Gπ, i  is a shortest-paths tree with root i . ( Hint:  T o
show that Gπ, i  is acyclic, first show that 
  implies 
 ,
according to the definition of 
 . Then adapt the proof of Lemma 22.16.)
23.2-4
As it appears on page 657, the Floyd-W arshall algorithm requires Θ( n3)
space, since it creates 
  for i , j , k  = 1, 2, … , n . Show that the procedure
F LOYD -W ARSHALL ′, which simply drops all the superscripts, is correct, and
thus only Θ( n2) space is required.
F LOYD -W ARSHALL ′( W , n )
1 D  = W
2 for  k  = 1 to  n
3 for  i  = 1 to  n
4 for  j  = 1 to  n
5 d ij  = min { d ij , d ik  + d kj }
6 r eturn  D
23.2-5
Page number: 780
Consider the following change to how equation (23.8) handles equality:
Is this alternative definition of the predecessor matrix Π correct?
23.2-6
Show how to use the output of the Floyd-W arshall algorithm to detect the
presence of a negative-weight cycle.
23.2-7
Another way to reconstruct shortest paths in the Floyd-W arshall algorithm
uses values 
  for i , j , k  = 1, 2, … , n , where 
  is the highest-numbered
intermediate vertex of a shortest path from i  to j  in which all intermediate
vertices lie in the set {1, 2, … , k }. Give a recursive formulation for 
 ,
modify the F LOYD -W ARSHALL  procedure to compute the 
  values, and
rewrite the P RINT -A LL -P AIRS -S HOR TEST -P A TH  procedure to take the matrix 
 as an input. How is the matrix Φ like the s  table in the matrix-
chain multiplication problem of Section 14.2 ?
23.2-8
Give an O ( VE )-time algorithm for computing the transitive closure of a
directed graph G  = ( V , E ). Assume that | V | = O ( E ) and that the graph is
represented with adjacency lists.
23.2-9
Suppose that it takes f (| V |, | E |) time to compute the transitive closure of a
directed acyclic graph, where f  is a monotonically increasing function of
both | V | and | E |. Show that the time to compute the transitive closure G * =
( V , E *) of a general directed graph G  = ( V , E ) is then f (| V |, | E |) + O ( V  + E *).
23.3    Johnson’ s algorithm for sparse graphs
Johnson’ s algorithm finds shortest paths between all pairs in O ( V2 lg V  +
VE ) time. For sparse graphs, it is asymptotically faster than either repeated
squaring of matrices or the Floyd-W arshall algorithm. The algorithm either
returns a matrix of shortest-path weights for all pairs of vertices or reports
that the input graph contains a negative-weight cycle. Johnson’ s algorithm
Page number: 781
uses as subroutines both Dijkstra’ s algorithm and the Bellman-Ford
algorithm, which Chapter 22  describes.
Johnson’ s algorithm uses the technique of reweighting , which works as
follows. If all edge weights w  in a graph G  = ( V , E ) are nonnegative,
Dijkstra’ s algorithm can find shortest paths between all pairs of vertices by
running it once from each vertex. W ith the Fibonacci-heap min-priority
queue, the running time of this all-pairs algorithm is O ( V2 lg V  + VE ). If G
has negative-weight edges but no negative-weight cycles, first compute a
new set of nonnegative edge weights so that Dijkstra’ s algorithm applies.
The new set of edge weights ŵ  must satisfy two important properties:
1 . For all pairs of vertices u, v  ∈  V , a path p  is a shortest path from u
to v  using weight function w  if and only if p  is also a shortest path
from u  to v  using weight function ŵ .
2 . For all edges ( u , v ), the new weight ŵ ( u , v ) is nonnegative.
As we’ll see in a moment, preprocessing G  to determine the new weight
function ŵ  takes O ( VE ) time.
Pr eserving shortest paths by r eweighting
The following lemma shows how to reweight the edges to satisfy the first
property above. W e use δ to denote shortest-path weights derived from
weight function w  and 
  to denote shortest-path weights derived from
weight function ŵ .
Lemma 23.1 (Reweighting does not change shortest paths)
Given a weighted, directed graph G  = ( V , E ) with weight function w  : E  →
ℝ , let h  : V  → ℝ  be any function mapping vertices to real numbers. For
each edge ( u , v ) ∈  E , define
Let p  = 〈 v0 , v1 , … , vk〉  be any path from vertex v0  to vertex vk . Then p  is a
shortest path from v0  to vk  with weight function w  if and only if it is a
shortest path with weight function ŵ . That is, w ( p ) = δ( v0 , vk ) if and only if 
. Furthermore, G  has a negative-weight cycle using weight
function w  if and only if G  has a negative-weight cycle using weight
function ŵ .
Page number: 782
Proof    W e start by showing that
W e have
Therefore, any path p  from v0  to vk  has ŵ ( p ) = w ( p ) + h ( v0 ) − h ( vk ). Because
h ( v0 ) and h ( vk ) do not depend on the path, if one path from v0  to vk  is shorter
than another using weight function w , then it is also shorter using ŵ . Thus,
w ( p ) = δ( v0 , vk ) if and only if 
 .
Finally , we show that G  has a negative-weight cycle using weight
function w  if and only if G  has a negative-weight cycle using weight
function ŵ . Consider any cycle c  = 〈 v0 , v1 , … , vk〉 , where v0  = vk . By
equation (23.1 1),
ŵ ( c ) = w ( c ) + h ( v 0 ) + h ( v k )
= w ( c ),
and thus c  has negative weight using w  if and only if it has negative weight
using ŵ .
▪
Pr oducing nonnegative weights by r eweighting
Our next goal is to ensure that the second property holds: ŵ ( u , v ) must be
nonnegative for all edges ( u , v ) = E . Given a weighted, directed graph G  =
( V , E ) with weight function w  : E  → ℝ , we’ll see how to make a new graph
G ′ = ( V ′, E ′), where V ′ = V  ∪  { s } for some new vertex s  ∉  V  and E ′ = E  ∪
{( s , v ) : v  = V  }. T o incorporate the new vertex s , extend the weight function
w  so that w ( s , v ) = 0 for all v  ∈  V . Since no edges enter s , no shortest paths
in G ′, other than those with source s , contain s . Moreover , G ′ has no
negative-weight cycles if and only if G  has no negative-weight cycles.
Page number: 783
Figure 23.6(a)  shows the graph G ′ corresponding to the graph G  of Figure
23.1 .
Now suppose that G  and G ′ have no negative-weight cycles. Define the
function h ( v ) = δ( s , v ) for all v  ∈  V ′. By the triangle inequality (Lemma
22.10 on page 633), we have h ( v ) ≤ h ( u ) + w ( u , v ) for all edges ( u , v ) ∈  E ′.
Thus, by defining reweighted edge weights ŵ  according to equation
(23.10), we have ŵ ( u , v ) = w ( u , v ) + h ( u ) − h ( v ) ≥ 0, thereby satisfying the
second property . Figure 23.6(b)  shows the graph G ′ from Figure 23.6(a)
with reweighted edges.
Computing all-pairs shortest paths
Johnson’ s algorithm to compute all-pairs shortest paths uses the Bellman-
Ford algorithm ( Section 22.1 ) and Dijkstra’ s algorithm ( Section 22.3 ) as
subroutines. The pseudocode appears in the procedure J OHNSON  on page
666. It assumes implicitly that the edges are stored in adjacency lists. The
algorithm returns the usual | V | × | V | matrix D  = ( dij ), where dij  = δ( i , j ), or it
reports that the input graph contains a negative-weight cycle. As is typical
for an all-pairs shortest-paths algorithm, it assumes that the vertices are
numbered from 1 to | V |.
Page number: 784
Figur e 23.6  Johnson’ s all-pairs shortest-paths algorithm run on the graph of Figure 23.1 . V ertex
numbers appear outside the vertices. (a)  The graph G ′ with the original weight function w . The new
vertex s  is blue. W ithin each vertex v  is h ( v ) = δ( s , v ). (b)  After reweighting each edge ( u , v ) with
weight function ŵ ( u , v ) = w ( u , v ) + h ( u ) − h ( v ). (c)–(g)  The result of running Dijkstra’ s algorithm on
each vertex of G  using weight function ŵ . In each part, the source vertex u  is blue, and blue edges
belong to the shortest-paths tree computed by the algorithm. W ithin each vertex v  are the values 
and δ( u , v ), separated by a slash. The value d uv  = δ( u , v ) is equal to 
 .
J OHNSON ( G , w )
  1 compute G ′, where G ′. V  = G.V  ∪  { s },
G ′. E  = G.E  ∪  {( s , v ) : v  ∈  G.V }, and
w ( s , v ) = 0 for all v  ∈  G.V
  2 if  B ELLMAN -F ORD ( G ′, w , s ) == F ALSE
Page number: 785
  3 print “the input graph contains a negative-weight cycle”
  4 else for  each vertex v  ∈  G ′. V
  5 set h ( v ) to the value of δ( s , v )
computed by the Bellman-Ford algorithm
  6 for  each edge ( u , v ) ∈  G ′. E
  7 ŵ ( u , v ) = w ( u , v ) + h ( u ) − h ( v )
  8 let D  = ( d uv ) be a new n  × n  matrix
  9 for  each vertex u  ∈  G.V
10run D IJKSTRA ( G , ŵ , u ) to compute 
  for all v  ∈  G.V
1 1 for each vertex v  ∈  G.V
12
13 r eturn  D
The J OHNSON  procedure simply performs the actions specified earlier .
Line 1 produces G ′. Line 2 runs the Bellman-Ford algorithm on G ′ with
weight function w  and source vertex s . If G ′, and hence G , contains a
negative-weight cycle, line 3 reports the problem. Lines 4–12 assume that
G ′ contains no negative-weight cycles. Lines 4–5 set h ( v ) to the shortest-
path weight δ( s , v ) computed by the Bellman-Ford algorithm for all v  ∈  V ′.
Lines 6–7 compute the new weights ŵ . For each pair of vertices u , v  ∈  V ,
the for  loop of lines 9–12 computes the shortest-path weight 
  by
calling Dijkstra’ s algorithm once from each vertex in V . Line 12 stores in
matrix entry duv  the correct shortest-path weight δ( u , v ), calculated using
equation (23.1 1). Finally , line 13 returns the completed D  matrix. Figure
23.6  depicts the execution of Johnson’ s algorithm.
If the min-priority queue in Dijkstra’ s algorithm is implemented by a
Fibonacci heap, Johnson’ s algorithm runs in O ( V2 lg V  + VE ) time. The
simpler binary min-heap implementation yields a running time of O ( VE  lg
V ), which is still asymptotically faster than the Floyd-W arshall algorithm if
the graph is sparse.
Exer cises
23.3-1
Use Johnson’ s algorithm to find the shortest paths between all pairs of
vertices in the graph of Figure 23.2 . Show the values of h  and ŵ  computed
by the algorithm.
23.3-2
Page number: 786
What is the purpose of adding the new vertex s  to V , yielding V ′?
23.3-3
Suppose that w ( u , v ) ≥ 0 for all edges ( u , v ) ∈  E . What is the relationship
between the weight functions w  and ŵ ?
23.3-4
Professor Greenstreet claims that there is a simpler way to reweight edges
than the method used in Johnson’ s algorithm. Letting w * = min { w ( u , v ) :
( u , v ) ∈  E }, just define ŵ ( u , v ) = w ( u , v ) − w * for all edges ( u , v ) ∈  E .
What is wrong with the professor ’ s method of reweighting?
23.3-5
Show that if G  contains a 0-weight cycle c , then ŵ ( u , v ) = 0 for every edge
( u , v ) in c .
23.3-6
Professor Michener claims that there is no need to create a new source
vertex in line 1 of J OHNSON . He suggests using G ′ = G  instead and letting s
be any vertex. Give an example of a weighted, directed graph G  for which
incorporating the professor ’ s idea into J OHNSON  causes incorrect answers.
Assume that ∞ − ∞ is undefined, and in particular , it is not 0. Then show
that if G  is strongly connected (every vertex is reachable from every other
vertex), the results returned by J OHNSON  with the professor ’ s modification
are correct.
Pr oblems
23-1     T ransitive closure of a dynamic graph
Y ou wish to maintain the transitive closure of a directed graph G  = ( V , E ) as
you insert edges into E . That is, after inserting an edge, you update the
transitive closure of the edges inserted so far . Start with G  having no edges
initially , and represent the transitive closure by a boolean matrix.
a.  Show how to update the transitive closure G * = ( V , E *) of a graph G  =
( V , E ) in O ( V2) time when a new edge is added to G .
Page number: 787
b.  Give an example of a graph G  and an edge e  such that Ω( V2) time is
required to update the transitive closure after inserting e  into G , no matter
what algorithm is used.
c.  Give an algorithm for updating the transitive closure as edges are inserted
into the graph. For any sequence of r  insertions, your algorithm should
run in time 
 , where ti  is the time to update the transitive
closure upon inserting the i th edge. Prove that your algorithm attains this
time bound.
23-2     Shortest paths in ϵ -dense graphs
A graph G  = ( V , E ) is ϵ -dense  if | E | = Θ( V1+ ϵ) for some constant in the
range 0 < ϵ  ≤ 1. d -ary min-heaps (see Problem 6-2 on page 179) provide a
way to match the running times of Fibonacci-heap-based shortest-path
algorithms on ϵ -dense graphs without using as complicated a data structure.
a.  What are the asymptotic running times for the operations I NSER T ,
E XTRACT -M IN , and D ECREASE -K EY , as a function of d  and the number n  of
elements in a d -ary min-heap? What are these running times if you choose
d  = Θ( nπ) for some constant 0 < α  ≤ 1? Compare these running times to
the amortized costs of these operations for a Fibonacci heap.
b.  Show how to compute shortest paths from a single source on an ϵ -dense
directed graph G  = ( V , E ) with no negative-weight edges in O ( E ) time.
( Hint:  Pick d  as a function of ϵ .)
c.  Show how to solve the all-pairs shortest-paths problem on an ϵ -dense
directed graph G  = ( V , E ) with no negative-weight edges in O ( VE ) time.
d.  Show how to solve the all-pairs shortest-paths problem in O ( VE ) time on
an ϵ -dense directed graph G  = ( V , E ) that may have negative-weight
edges but has no negative-weight cycles.
Chapter notes
Lawler [ 276 ] has a good discussion of the all-pairs shortest-paths problem.
He attributes the matrix-multiplication algorithm to the folklore. The Floyd-
W arshall algorithm is due to Floyd [ 144 ], who based it on a theorem of
Page number: 788
W arshall [ 450 ] that describes how to compute the transitive closure of
boolean matrices. Johnson’ s algorithm is taken from [ 238 ].
Several researchers have given improved algorithms for computing
shortest paths via matrix multiplication. Fredman [ 153 ] shows how to solve
the all-pairs shortest paths problem using O ( V5/2) comparisons between
sums of edge weights and obtains an algorithm that runs in O ( V3lg lg V /lg
V /1/3) time, which is slightly better than the running time of the Floyd-
W arshall algorithm. This bound has been improved several times, and the
fastest algorithm is now by W illiams [ 457 ], with a running time of 
.
Another line of research demonstrates how to apply algorithms for fast
matrix multiplication (see the chapter notes for Chapter 4 ) to the all-pairs
shortest paths problem. Let O ( nω) be the running time of the fastest
algorithm for multiplying two n  × n  matrices. Galil and Mar galit [ 170 , 171 ]
and Seidel [ 403 ] designed algorithms that solve the all-pairs shortest paths
problem in undirected, unweighted graphs in ( Vωp ( V )) time, where p ( n )
denotes a particular function that is polylogarithmically bounded in n . In
dense graphs, these algorithms are faster than the O ( VE ) time needed to
perform | V | breadth-first searches. Several researchers have extended these
results to give algorithms for solving the all-pairs shortest paths problem in
undirected graphs in which the edge weights are integers in the range {1, 2,
… , W }. The asymptotically fastest such algorithm, by Shoshan and Zwick
[ 410 ], runs in O ( W Vωp ( V W )) time. In directed graphs, the best algorithm
to date is due to Zwick [ 467 ] and runs in Õ ( W1/(4−ω)V2+1/(4−ω)) time.
Kar ger , Koller , and Phillips [ 244 ] and independently McGeoch [ 320 ]
have given a time bound that depends on E *, the set of edges in E  that
participate in some shortest path. Given a graph with nonnegative edge
weights, their algorithms run in O ( VE * + V2 lg V ) time and improve upon
running Dijkstra’ s algorithm | V | times when | E *| = o ( E ). Pettie [ 355 ] uses an
approach based on component hierarchies to achieve a running time of
O ( VE  + V2 lg lg V ), and the same running time is also achieved by Hagerup
[ 205 ].
Baswana, Hariharan, and Sen [ 37 ] examined decremental algorithms,
which allow a sequence of intermixed edge deletions and queries, for
maintaining all-pairs shortest paths and transitive-closure information.
When a path exists, their randomized transitive-closure algorithm can fail to
Page number: 789
report it with probability 1/ nc for an arbitrary c  > 0. The query times are
O (1) with high probability . For transitive closure, the amortized time for
each update is O ( V4/3 lg1/3V ). By comparison, Problem 23-1, in which edges
are inserted, asks for an incremental algorithm. For all-pairs shortest paths,
the update times depend on the queries. For queries just giving the shortest-
path weights, the amortized time per update is O ( V3/ E  lg2V ). T o report the
actual shortest path, the amortized update time is min 
. Demetrescu and Italiano [ 1 1 1 ] showed how to
handle update and query operations when edges are both inserted and
deleted, as long as the range of edge weights is bounded.
Aho, Hopcroft, and Ullman [ 5 ] defined an algebraic structure known as
a “closed semiring,” which serves as a general framework for solving path
problems in directed graphs. Both the Floyd-W arshall algorithm and the
transitive-closure algorithm from Section 23.2  are instantiations of an all-
pairs algorithm based on closed semirings. Maggs and Plotkin [ 309 ]
showed how to find minimum spanning trees using a closed semiring.
1 According to a report cited by U.S. Department of T ransportation Federal Highway Administration,
“a reasonable ‘rule of thumb’ is one signalized intersection per 1,000 population.”
2 An algebraic semiring  contains operations ⊕ , which is commutative with identity I ⊕ , and ⊕ , with
identity I ⊕ , where ⊕  distributes over ⊕  on both the left and right, and where I ⊕ ⊕ x  = x ⊕ I ⊕  = I ⊕
for all x . Standard matrix multiplication, as in M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y , uses the semiring with + for ⊕ ,
⊕  for ⊕ , 0 for I ⊕ , and 1 for I ⊕ . The procedure E XTEND -S HOR TEST -P A THS  uses another
semiring, known as the tropical semiring , with min for ⊕ , + for ⊕ , ∞ for I ⊕ , and 0 for I ⊕ .
Page number: 790
24        Maximum Flow
Just as you can model a road map as a directed graph in order to find the
shortest path from one point to another , you can also interpret a directed
graph as a “flow network” and use it to answer questions about material
flows. Imagine a material coursing through a system from a source, where
the material is produced, to a sink, where it is consumed. The source
produces the material at some steady rate, and the sink consumes the
material at the same rate. The “flow” of the material at any point in the
system is intuitively the rate at which the material moves. Flow networks
can model many problems, including liquids flowing through pipes, parts
through assembly lines, current through electrical networks, and
information through communication networks.
Y ou can think of each directed edge in a flow network as a conduit for
the material. Each conduit has a stated capacity , given as a maximum rate at
which the material can flow through the conduit, such as 200 gallons of
liquid per hour through a pipe or 20 amperes of electrical current through a
wire. V ertices are conduit junctions, and other than the source and sink,
material flows through the vertices without collecting in them. In other
words, the rate at which material enters a vertex must equal the rate at
which it leaves the vertex. W e call this property “flow conservation,” and it
is equivalent to Kirchhof f ’ s current law when the material is electrical
current.
The goal of the maximum-flow problem is to compute the greatest rate
for shipping material from the source to the sink without violating any
capacity constraints. It is one of the simplest problems concerning flow
networks and, as we shall see in this chapter , this problem can be solved by
Page number: 791
ef ficient algorithms. Moreover , other network-flow problems are solvable
by adapting the basic techniques used in maximum-flow algorithms.
This chapter presents two general methods for solving the maximum-
flow problem. Section 24.1  formalizes the notions of flow networks and
flows, formally defining the maximum-flow problem. Section 24.2
describes the classical method of Ford and Fulkerson for finding maximum
flows. W e finish up with a simple application of this method, finding a
maximum matching in an undirected bipartite graph, in Section 24.3 .
( Section 25.1  will give a more ef ficient algorithm that is specifically
designed to find a maximum matching in a bipartite graph.)
24.1    Flow networks
This section gives a graph-theoretic definition of flow networks, discusses
their properties, and defines the maximum-flow problem precisely . It also
introduces some helpful notation.
Flow networks and flows
A flow network  G  = ( V , E ) is a directed graph in which each edge ( u , v ) ∈
E  has a nonnegative capacity  c ( u , v ) ≥ 0. W e further require that if E
contains an edge ( u , v ), then there is no edge ( v , u ) in the reverse direction.
(W e’ll see shortly how to work around this restriction.) If ( u , v ) ∉  E , then
for convenience we define c ( u , v ) = 0, and we disallow self-loops. Each
flow network contains two distinguished vertices: a source  s  and a sink  t .
For convenience, we assume that each vertex lies on some path from the
source to the sink. That is, for each vertex v  ∈  V , the flow network contains
a path s  ⇝  v  ⇝  t . Because each vertex other than s  has at least one entering
edge, we have | E | ≥ | V  | − 1. Figure 24.1  shows an example of a flow
network.
Page number: 792
Figur e 24.1 (a)  A flow network G  = ( V , E ) for the Lucky Puck Company’ s trucking problem. The
V ancouver factory is the source s , and the W innipeg warehouse is the sink t . The company ships
pucks through intermediate cities, but only c ( u , v ) crates per day can go from city u  to city v . Each
edge is labeled with its capacity . (b)  A flow f  in G  with value | f  | = 19. Each edge ( u , v ) is labeled by f
( u , v )/ c ( u , v ). The slash notation merely separates the flow and capacity and does not indicate
division.
W e are now ready to define flows more formally . Let G  = ( V , E ) be a
flow network with a capacity function c . Let s  be the source of the network,
and let t  be the sink. A flow  in G  is a real-valued function f  : V  × V  → ℝ
that satisfies the following two properties:
Capacity constraint:  For all u , v  ∈  V , we require
0 ≤ f ( u , v ) ≤ c ( u , v ).
The flow from one vertex to another must be nonnegative and must not
exceed the given capacity .
Flow conservation:  For all u  ∈  V  − { s , t }, we require
The total flow into a vertex other than the source or sink must equal the
total flow out of that vertex—informally , “flow in equals flow out.”
When ( u , v ) ∉  E , there can be no flow from u  to v , and f  ( u , v ) = 0.
W e call the nonnegative quantity f  ( u , v ) the flow from vertex u  to vertex
v . The value  | f  | of a flow f  is defined as
that is, the total flow out of the source minus the flow into the source.
(Here, the |·| notation denotes flow value, not absolute value or cardinality .)
Page number: 793
T ypically , a flow network does not have any edges into the source, and the
flow into the source, given by the summation Σv ∈ V  f ( v , s ), is 0. W e include
it, however , because when we introduce residual networks later in this
chapter , the flow into the source can be positive. In the maximum-flow
problem , the input is a flow network G  with source s  and sink t , and the
goal is to find a flow of maximum value.
An example of flow
A flow network can model the trucking problem shown in Figure
24.1(a) . The Lucky Puck Company has a factory (source s ) in V ancouver
that manufactures hockey pucks, and it has a warehouse (sink t ) in
W innipeg that stocks them. Lucky Puck leases space on trucks from another
firm to ship the pucks from the factory to the warehouse. Because the trucks
travel over specified routes (edges) between cities (vertices) and have a
limited capacity , Lucky Puck can ship at most c ( u , v ) crates per day
between each pair of cities u  and v  in Figure 24.1(a) . Lucky Puck has no
control over these routes and capacities, and so the company cannot alter
the flow network shown in Figure 24.1(a) . They need to determine the
lar gest number p  of crates per day that they can ship and then to produce
this amount, since there is no point in producing more pucks than they can
ship to their warehouse. Lucky Puck is not concerned with how long it
takes for a given puck to get from the factory to the warehouse. They care
only that p  crates per day leave the factory and p  crates per day arrive at the
warehouse.
Figur e 24.2  Converting a network with antiparallel edges to an equivalent one with no antiparallel
edges. (a)  A flow network containing both the edges ( v 1 , v 2 ) and ( v 2 , v 1 ). (b)  An equivalent network
with no antiparallel edges. A new vertex v ′ was added, and edge ( v 1 , v 2 ) was replaced by the pair of
edges ( v 1 , v ′) and ( v ′, v 2 ), both with the same capacity as ( v 1 , v 2 ).
Page number: 794
A flow in this network models the “flow” of shipments because the
number of crates shipped per day from one city to another is subject to a
capacity constraint. Additionally , the model must obey flow conservation,
for in a steady state, the rate at which pucks enter an intermediate city must
equal the rate at which they leave. Otherwise, crates would accumulate at
intermediate cities.
Modeling pr oblems with antiparallel edges
Suppose that the trucking firm of fers Lucky Puck the opportunity to lease
space for 10 crates in trucks going from Edmonton to Calgary . It might
seem natural to add this opportunity to our example and form the network
shown in Figure 24.2(a) . This network suf fers from one problem, however:
it violates the original assumption that if edge ( v1 , v2 ) ∈  E , then ( v2 , v1 ) ∉
E . W e call the two edges ( v1 , v2 ) and ( v2 , v1 ) antiparallel . Thus, to model a
flow problem with antiparallel edges, the network must be transformed into
an equivalent one containing no antiparallel edges. Figure 24.2(b)  displays
this equivalent network. T o transform the network, choose one of the two
antiparallel edges, in this case ( v1 , v2 ), and split it by adding a new vertex v ′
and replacing edge ( v1 , v2 ) with the pair of edges ( v1 , v ′) and ( v ′, v2 ). Also
set the capacity of both new edges to the capacity of the original edge. The
resulting network satisfies the property that if an edge belongs to the
network, the reverse edge does not. As Exercise 24.1-1 asks you to prove,
the resulting network is equivalent to the original one.
Page number: 795
Figur e 24.3  Converting a multiple-source, multiple-sink maximum-flow problem into a problem
with a single source and a single sink. (a)  A flow network with three sources S  = { s 1 , s 2 , s 3 } and two
sinks T  = { t 1 , t 2 }. (b)  An equivalent single-source, single-sink flow network. Add a supersource s
and an edge with infinite capacity from s  to each of the multiple sources. Also add a supersink t  and
an edge with infinite capacity from each of the multiple sinks to t .
Networks with multiple sour ces and sinks
A maximum-flow problem may have several sources and sinks, rather than
just one of each. The Lucky Puck Company , for example, might actually
have a set of m  factories { s1 , s2 , …, sm } and a set of n  warehouses { t1 , t2 ,
…, tn }, as shown in Figure 24.3(a) . Fortunately , this problem is no harder
than ordinary maximum flow .
The problem of determining a maximum flow in a network with
multiple sources and multiple sinks reduces to an ordinary maximum-flow
problem. Figure 24.3(b)  shows how to convert the network from (a) to an
ordinary flow network with only a single source and a single sink. Add a
supersource  s  and add a directed edge ( s , si ) with capacity c ( s , si ) = ∞ for
each i  = 1, 2, …, m . Similarly , create a new supersink  t  and add a directed
edge ( ti , t ) with capacity c ( ti , t ) = ∞ for each i  = 1, 2, …, n . Intuitively , any
flow in the network in (a) corresponds to a flow in the network in (b), and
vice versa. The single supersource s  provides as much flow as desired for
the multiple sources si , and the single supersink t  likewise consumes as
much flow as desired for the multiple sinks ti . Exercise 24.1-2 asks you to
prove formally that the two problems are equivalent.
Page number: 796
Exer cises
24.1-1
Show that splitting an edge in a flow network yields an equivalent network.
More formally , suppose that flow network G  contains edge ( u , v ), and
define a new flow network G ′ by creating a new vertex x  and replacing ( u ,
v ) by new edges ( u , x ) and ( x , v ) with c ( u , x ) = c ( x , v ) = c ( u , v ). Show that a
maximum flow in G ′ has the same value as a maximum flow in G .
24.1-2
Extend the flow properties and definitions to the multiple-source, multiple-
sink problem. Show that any flow in a multiple-source, multiple-sink flow
network corresponds to a flow of identical value in the single-source,
single-sink network obtained by adding a supersource and a supersink, and
vice versa.
24.1-3
Suppose that a flow network G  = ( V , E ) violates the assumption that the
network contains a path s  ⇝  v  ⇝  t  for all vertices v  ∈  V . Let u  be a vertex
for which there is no path s  ⇝  u  ⇝  t . Show that there must exist a maximum
flow f  in G  such that f  ( u , v ) = f  ( v , u ) = 0 for all vertices v  ∈  V .
24.1-4
Let f  be a flow in a network, and let α  be a real number . The scalar flow
product , denoted αf , is a function from V  × V  to ℝ  defined by
( αf )( u , v ) = α  · f  ( u , v ).
Prove that the flows in a network form a convex set . That is, show that if f1
and f2  are flows, then so is αf1  + (1 − α ) f2  for all α  in the range 0 ≤ α  ≤ 1.
24.1-5
State the maximum-flow problem as a linear -programming problem.
24.1-6
Professor Adam has two children who, unfortunately , dislike each other .
The problem is so severe that not only do they refuse to walk to school
together , but in fact each one refuses to walk on any block that the other
child has stepped on that day . The children have no problem with their
Page number: 797
paths crossing at a corner . Fortunately both the professor ’ s house and the
school are on corners, but beyond that he is not sure if it is going to be
possible to send both of his children to the same school. The professor has a
map of his town. Show how to formulate the problem of determining
whether both his children can go to the same school as a maximum-flow
problem.
24.1-7
Suppose that, in addition to edge capacities, a flow network has vertex
capacities . That is each vertex v  has a limit l ( v ) on how much flow can pass
through v . Show how to transform a flow network G  = ( V , E ) with vertex
capacities into an equivalent flow network G ′ = ( V ′, E ′) without vertex
capacities, such that a maximum flow in G ′ has the same value as a
maximum flow in G . How many vertices and edges does G ′ have?
24.2    The Ford-Fulkerson method
This section presents the Ford-Fulkerson method for solving the maximum-
flow problem. W e call it a “method” rather than an “algorithm” because it
encompasses several implementations with dif fering running times. The
Ford-Fulkerson method depends on three important ideas that transcend the
method and are relevant to many flow algorithms and problems: residual
networks, augmenting paths, and cuts. These ideas are essential to the
important max-flow min-cut theorem (Theorem 24.6), which characterizes
the value of a maximum flow in terms of cuts of the flow network. W e end
this section by presenting one specific implementation of the Ford-
Fulkerson method and analyzing its running time.
The Ford-Fulkerson method iteratively increases the value of the flow . It
starts with f  ( u , v ) = 0 for all u , v  ∈  V , giving an initial flow of value 0.
Each iteration increases the flow value in G  by finding an “augmenting
path” in an associated “residual network” Gf . The edges of the augmenting
path in Gf  indicate on which edges in G  to update the flow in order to
increase the flow value. Although each iteration of the Ford-Fulkerson
method increases the value of the flow , we’ll see that the flow on any
particular edge of G  may increase or decrease. Although it might seem
counterintuitive to decrease the flow on an edge, doing so may enable flow
to increase on other edges, allowing more flow to travel from the source to
Page number: 798
the sink. The Ford-Fulkerson method, given in the procedure F ORD -
F ULKERSON -M ETHOD , repeatedly augments the flow until the residual
network has no more augmenting paths. The max-flow min-cut theorem
shows that upon termination, this process yields a maximum flow .
F ORD -F ULKERSON -M ETHOD  ( G , s , t )
1 initialize flow f  to 0
2 while  there exists an augmenting path p  in the residual network G f
3 augment flow f  along p
4 r eturn  f
In order to implement and analyze the Ford-Fulkerson method, we need
to introduce several additional concepts.
Residual networks
Intuitively , given a flow network G  and a flow f , the residual network Gf
consists of edges whose capacities represent how the flow can change on
edges of G . An edge of the flow network can admit an amount of additional
flow equal to the edge’ s capacity minus the flow on that edge. If that value
is positive, that edge goes into Gf  with a “residual capacity” of cf  ( u , v ) =
c ( u , v ) − f  ( u , v ). The only edges of G  that belong to Gf  are those that can
admit more flow . Those edges ( u , v ) whose flow equals their capacity have
cf  ( u , v ) = 0, and they do not belong to Gf .
Y ou might be surprised that the residual network Gf  can also contain
edges that are not in G . As an algorithm manipulates the flow , with the goal
of increasing the total flow , it might need to decrease the flow on a
particular edge in order to increase the flow elsewhere. In order to represent
a possible decrease in the positive flow f  ( u , v ) on an edge in G , the residual
network Gf  contains an edge ( v , u ) with residual capacity cf  ( v , u ) = f  ( u , v )
—that is, an edge that can admit flow in the opposite direction to ( u , v ), at
most canceling out the flow on ( u , v ). These reverse edges in the residual
network allow an algorithm to send back flow it has already sent along an
edge. Sending flow back along an edge is equivalent to decr easing  the flow
on the edge, which is a necessary operation in many algorithms.
More formally , for a flow network G  = ( V , E ) with source s , sink t , and a
flow f , consider a pair of vertices u , v  ∈  V . W e define the residual
Page number: 799
capacity  cf  ( u , v ) by
In a flow network, ( u , v ) ∈  E  implies ( v , u ) ∉  E , and so exactly one case in
equation (24.2) applies to each ordered pair of vertices.
As an example of equation (24.2), if c ( u , v ) = 16 and f  ( u , v ) = 1 1, then f
( u , v ) can increase by up to cf  ( u , v ) = 5 units before exceeding the capacity
constraint on edge ( u , v ). Alternatively , up to 1 1 units of flow can return
from v  to u , so that cf  ( v , u ) = 1 1.
Given a flow network G  = ( V , E ) and a flow f , the residual network  of G
induced by f  is Gf  = ( V , Ef ), where
Figur e 24.4 (a)  The flow network G  and flow f  of Figure 24.1(b) . (b)  The residual network G f  with
augmenting path p , having residual capacity c f  ( p ) = c f  ( v 2 , v 3 ) = 4, in blue. Edges with residual
capacity equal to 0, such as ( v 1 , v 3 ), are not shown, a convention we follow in the remainder of this
section. (c)  The flow in G  that results from augmenting along path p  by its residual capacity 4. Edges
carrying no flow , such as ( v 3 , v 2 ), are labeled only by their capacity , another convention we follow
throughout. (d)  The residual network induced by the flow in (c).
That is, as promised above, each edge of the residual network, or residual
edge , can admit a flow that is greater than 0. Figure 24.4(a)  repeats the flow
network G  and flow f  of Figure 24.1(b) , and Figure 24.4(b)  shows the
Page number: 800
corresponding residual network Gf . The edges in Ef  are either edges in E  or
their reversals, and thus
| Ef | ≤ 2 | E |.
Observe that the residual network Gf  is similar to a flow network with
capacities given by cf . It does not satisfy the definition of a flow network,
however , because it could contain antiparallel edges. Other than this
dif ference, a residual network has the same properties as a flow network,
and we can define a flow in the residual network as one that satisfies the
definition of a flow , but with respect to capacities cf  in the residual network
Gf .
A flow in a residual network provides a roadmap for adding flow to the
original flow network. If f  is a flow in G  and f ′ is a flow in the
corresponding residual network Gf , we define f  ↑ f ′, the augmentation  of
flow f  by f  ′, to be a function from V  × V  to ℝ , defined by
The intuition behind this definition follows the definition of the residual
network. The flow on ( u , v ) increases by f  ′( u , v ), but decreases by f  ′( v , u )
because pushing flow on the reverse edge in the residual network signifies
decreasing the flow in the original network. Pushing flow on the reverse
edge in the residual network is also known as cancellation . For example,
suppose that 5 crates of hockey pucks go from u  to v  and 2 crates go from v
to u . That is equivalent (from the perspective of the final result) to sending
3 crates from u  to v  and none from v  to u . Cancellation of this type is crucial
for any maximum-flow algorithm.
The following lemma shows that augmenting a flow in G  by a flow in Gf
yields a new flow in G  with a greater flow value.
Lemma 24.1
Let G  = ( V , E ) be a flow network with source s  and sink t , and let f  be a
flow in G . Let Gf  be the residual network of G  induced by f , and let f  ′ be a
flow in Gf . Then the function f  ↑ f  ′ defined in equation (24.4) is a flow in G
with value | f  ↑ f  ′| = | f  | + | f  ′|.
Page number: 801
Proof    W e first verify that f  ↑ f  ′ obeys the capacity constraint for each edge
in E  and flow conservation at each vertex in V  − { s , t }.
For the capacity constraint, first observe that if ( u , v ) ∈  E , then cf  ( v , u )
= f  ( u , v ). Because f  ′ is a flow in Gf , we have f  ′( v , u ) ≤ cf  ( v , u ), which gives
f  ′( v , u ) ≤ f  ( u , v ). Therefore,
( f  ↑ f ′)( u , v ) = f  ( u , v ) + f  ′( u , v ) − f  ′( v , u ) (by equation (24.4))
≥ f  ( u , v ) + f  ′( u , v ) − f  ( u , v ) (because f  ′( v , u ) ≤ f  ( u , v ))
= f  ′( u , v )
≥ 0.
In addition,
( f  ↑ f ′)( u , v )
= f  ( u , v ) + f  ′( u , v ) − f  ′( v , u ) (by equation (24.4))
≤ f  ( u , v ) + f  ′( u , v ) (because flows are nonnegative)
≤ f  ( u , v ) + c f  ( u , v ) (capacity constraint)
= f  ( u , v ) + c ( u , v ) − f  ( u , v ) (definition of c f )
= c ( u , v ).
T o show that flow conservation holds and that | f  ↑ f  ′| = | f  | + | f  ′|, we first
prove the claim that for all u  ∈  V , we have
Because we disallow antiparallel edges in G  (but not in Gf ), we know that
for each vertex u , there can be an edge ( u , v ) or ( v , u ) in G , but never both.
For a fixed vertex u , define Vl ( u ) = { v  : ( u , v ) ∈  E } to be the set of vertices
with edges in G  leaving u , and define Ve ( u ) = { v  : ( v , u ) ∈  E } to be the set
of vertices with edges in G  entering u . W e have Vl ( u ) ∪  Ve ( u ) ⊆  V  and,
because G  contains no antiparallel edges, Vl ( u ) ∩ Ve ( u ) = ∅ . By the
definition of flow augmentation in equation (24.4), only vertices v  in Vl ( u )
can have positive ( f  ↑ f ′)( u , v ), and only vertices v  in Ve ( u ) can have positive
( f  ↑ f  ′)( v , u ). Starting from the left-hand side of equation (24.5), we use this
fact and then reorder and group terms, giving
Page number: 802
In equation (24.6), all four summations can extend to sum over V , since
each additional term has value 0. (Exercise 24.2-1 asks you to prove this
formally .) T aking all four summations over V , instead of just subsets of V ,
proves the claim in equation (24.5).
Now we are ready to prove flow conservation for f  ↑ f  ′ and that | f  ↑ f ′| = |
f  | + | f  ′|. For the latter property , let u  = s  in equation (24.5). Then, we have
For flow conservation, observe that for any vertex u  that is neither s  nor t ,
flow conservation for f  and f  ′ means that the right-hand side of equation
(24.5) is 0, and thus Σv ∈ V  ( f  ↑ f ′)( u , v ) = Σv ∈ V  ( f  ↑ f ′)( v , u ).
▪
Augmenting paths
Given a flow network G  = ( V , E ) and a flow f , an augmenting path  p  is a
simple path from s  to t  in the residual network Gf . By the definition of the
residual network, the flow on an edge ( u , v ) of an augmenting path may
increase by up to cf  ( u , v ) without violating the capacity constraint on
whichever of ( u , v ) and ( v , u ) belongs to the original flow network G .
Page number: 803
The blue path in Figure 24.4(b)  is an augmenting path. T reating the
residual network Gf  in the figure as a flow network, the flow through each
edge of this path can increase by up to 4 units without violating a capacity
constraint, since the smallest residual capacity on this path is cf  ( v2 , v3 ) = 4.
W e call the maximum amount by which we can increase the flow on each
edge in an augmenting path p  the residual capacity  of p , given by
cf  ( p ) = min { cf  ( u , v ) : ( u , v ) is in p }.
The following lemma, which Exercise 24.2-7 asks you to prove, makes the
above ar gument more precise.
Lemma 24.2
Let G  = ( V , E ) be a flow network, let f  be a flow in G , and let p  be an
augmenting path in Gf . Define a function fp  : V  × V  → ℝ  by
Then, fp  is a flow in Gf  with value | fp | = cf  ( p ) > 0.
▪
The following corollary shows that augmenting f  by fp  produces another
flow in G  whose value is closer to the maximum. Figure 24.4(c)  shows the
result of augmenting the flow f  from Figure 24.4(a)  by the flow fp  in Figure
24.4(b) , and Figure 24.4(d)  shows the ensuing residual network.
Corollary 24.3
Let G  = ( V , E ) be a flow network, let f  be a flow in G , and let p  be an
augmenting path in Gf . Let fp  be defined as in equation (24.7), and suppose
that f  is augmented by fp . Then the function f  ↑ fp  is a flow in G  with value | f
↑ fp | = | f | + | fp | > | f |.
Proof    Immediate from Lemmas 24.1 and 24.2.
▪
Cuts of flow networks
The Ford-Fulkerson method repeatedly augments the flow along
augmenting paths until it has found a maximum flow . How do we know that
Page number: 804
when the algorithm terminates, it has actually found a maximum flow? The
max-flow min-cut theorem, which we will prove shortly , tells us that a flow
is maximum if and only if its residual network contains no augmenting
path. T o prove this theorem, though, we must first explore the notion of a
cut of a flow network.
A cut  ( S , T ) of flow network G  = ( V , E ) is a partition of V  into S  and T  =
V  − S  such that s  ∈  S  and t  ∈  T . (This definition is similar to the definition
of “cut” that we used for minimum spanning trees in Chapter 21 , except
that here we are cutting a directed graph rather than an undirected graph,
and we insist that s  ∈  S  and t  ∈  T .) If f  is a flow , then the net flow  f ( S , T )
across the cut ( S , T ) is defined to be
The capacity  of the cut ( S , T ) is
A minimum cut  of a network is a cut whose capacity is minimum over all
cuts of the network.
Y ou probably noticed that the definitions of flow across a cut and
capacity of a cut dif fer in that flow counts edges going in both directions
across the cut, but capacity counts only edges going from the source side of
the cut toward the sink side. This asymmetry is intentional and important.
The reason for this dif ference will become apparent later in this section.
Figure 24.5  shows the cut ({ s , v1 , v2 }, { v3 , v4 , t }) in the flow network of
Figure 24.1(b) . The net flow across this cut is
f  ( v 1 , v 3 ) + f  ( v 2 , v 4 ) − f  ( v 3 , v 2 ) = 12 + 1 1 − 4
= 19,
and the capacity of this cut is
Page number: 805
Figur e 24.5  A cut ( S , T ) in the flow network of Figure 24.1(b) , where S  = { s , v 1 , v 2 } and T  = { v 3 , v 4 ,
t }. The vertices in S  are orange, and the vertices in T  are tan. The net flow across ( S , T ) is f  ( S , T ) =
19, and the capacity is c ( S , T ) = 26.
c ( v 1 , v 3 ) + c ( v 2 , v 4 ) = 12 + 14
= 26.
The following lemma shows that, for a given flow f , the net flow across
any cut is the same, and it equals | f |, the value of the flow .
Lemma 24.4
Let f  be a flow in a flow network G  with source s  and sink t , and let ( S , T )
be any cut of G . Then the net flow across ( S , T ) is f  ( S , T ) =| f |.
Proof    For any vertex u  ∈  V  − { s , t }, rewrite the flow-conservation
condition as
T aking the definition of| f | from equation (24.1) and adding the left-hand
side of equation (24.10), which equals 0, summed over all vertices in S  −
{ s }, gives
Expanding the right-hand summation and regrouping terms yields

Page number: 806
Because V  = S  ∪  T  and S  ∩ T  = ∅ , splitting each summation over V  into
summations over S  and T  gives
The two summations within the parentheses are actually the same, since for
all vertices x , y  ∈  S , the term f  ( x , y ) appears once in each summation.
Hence, these summations cancel, yielding
▪
A corollary to Lemma 24.4 shows how cut capacities bound the value of
a flow .
Corollary 24.5
The value of any flow f  in a flow network G  is bounded from above by the
capacity of any cut of G .
Proof    Let ( S , T ) be any cut of G  and let f  be any flow . By Lemma 24.4 and
the capacity constraint,
▪
Corollary 24.5 yields the immediate consequence that the value of a
maximum flow in a network is bounded from above by the capacity of a
minimum cut of the network. The important max-flow min-cut theorem,
Page number: 807
which we now state and prove, says that the value of a maximum flow is in
fact equal to the capacity of a minimum cut.
Theorem 24.6 (Max-flow min-cut theorem)
If f  is a flow in a flow network G  = ( V , E ) with source s  and sink t , then the
following conditions are equivalent:
1 . f  is a maximum flow in G .
2 . The residual network Gf  contains no augmenting paths.
3 . | f | = c ( S , T ) for some cut ( S , T ) of G .
Proof    (1) ⇒  (2): Suppose for the sake of contradiction that f  is a maximum
flow in G  but that Gf  has an augmenting path p . Then, by Corollary 24.3,
the flow found by augmenting f  by fp , where fp  is given by equation (24.7),
is a flow in G  with value strictly greater than | f |, contradicting the
assumption that f  is a maximum flow .
(2) ⇒  (3): Suppose that Gf  has no augmenting path, that is, that Gf
contains no path from s  to t . Define
S  = { v  ∈  V  : there exists a path from s  to v  in Gf  }
and T  = V  − S . The partition ( S , T ) is a cut: we have s  ∈  S  trivially and t  ∉
S  because there is no path from s  to t  in Gf . Now consider a pair of vertices
u  ∈  S  and v  ∈  T . If ( u , v ) ∈  E , we must have f  ( u , v ) = c ( u , v ), since
otherwise ( u , v ) ∈  Ef , which would place v  in set S . If ( v , u ) ∈  E , we must
have f  ( v , u ) = 0, because otherwise cf  ( u , v ) = f  ( v , u ) would be positive and
we would have ( u , v ) ∈  Ef , which again would place v  in S . Of course, if
neither ( u , v ) nor ( v , u ) belongs to E , then f  ( u , v ) = f  ( v , u ) = 0. W e thus
have
By Lemma 24.4, therefore, | f | = f  ( S , T ) = c ( S , T ).
(3) ⇒  (1): By Corollary 24.5, | f | ≤ c ( S , T ) for all cuts ( S , T ). The
condition | f | = c ( S , T ) thus implies that f  is a maximum flow .
Page number: 808
▪
The basic Ford-Fulkerson algorithm
Each iteration of the Ford-Fulkerson method finds some  augmenting path p
and uses p  to modify the flow f . As Lemma 24.2 and Corollary 24.3
suggest, replacing f  by f  ↑ fp  produces a new flow whose value is | f | + | fp |.
The procedure F ORD -F ULKERSON  on the next page implements the method
by updating the flow attribute ( u , v ). f  for each edge ( u , v ) ∈  E .1 It assumes
implicitly that ( u , v ). f  = 0 if ( u , v ) ∉  E . The procedure also assumes that the
capacities c ( u , v ) come with the flow network, and that c ( u , v ) = 0 if ( u , v )
∉  E . The procedure computes the residual capacity cf  ( u , v ) in accordance
with the formula (24.2). The expression cf  ( p ) in the code is just a temporary
variable that stores the residual capacity of the path p .
F ORD -F ULKERSON  ( G , s , t )
1 for  each edge ( u , v ) ∈  G . E
2 ( u , v ). f  = 0
3 while  there exists a path p  from s  to t  in the residual network G f
4 c f  ( p ) = min { c f  ( u , v ) : ( u , v ) is in p }
5 for  each edge ( u , v ) in p
6 if  ( u , v ) ∈  G . E
7 ( u , v ). f  = ( u , v ). f  + c f  ( p )
8 else  ( v , u ). f  = ( v , u ). f  − c f  ( p )
9 r eturn  f
The F ORD -F ULKERSON  procedure simply expands on the F ORD -
F ULKERSON -M ETHOD  pseudocode given earlier . Figure 24.6  shows the result
of each iteration in a sample run. Lines 1–2 initialize the flow f  to 0. The
while  loop of lines 3–8 repeatedly finds an augmenting path p  in Gf  and
augments flow f  along p  by the residual capacity cf  ( p ). Each residual edge
in path p  is either an edge in the original network or the reversal of an edge
in the original network. Lines 6–8 update the flow in each case
appropriately , adding flow when the residual edge is an original edge and
subtracting it otherwise. When no augmenting paths exist, the flow f  is a
maximum flow .
Analysis of Ford-Fulkerson
Page number: 809
The running time of F ORD -F ULKERSON  depends on the augmenting path p
and how it’ s found in line 3. If the edge capacities are irrational numbers,
it’ s possible to choose the augmenting path so that the algorithm never
terminates: the value of the flow increases with successive augmentations,
but never conver ges to the maximum flow value. The good news is that if
the algorithm finds the augmenting path by using a breadth-first search
(which we saw in Section 20.2 ), it runs in polynomial time. Before proving
this result, we obtain a simple bound for the case in which all capacities are
integers and the algorithm finds any augmenting path.
Page number: 810
Figur e 24.6  The execution of the basic Ford-Fulkerson algorithm. (a)–(e)  Successive iterations of the
while  loop. The left side of each part shows the residual network G f  from line 3 with a blue
augmenting path p . The right side of each part shows the new flow f  that results from augmenting f
by f p . The residual network in (a) is the input flow network G . (f)  The residual network at the last
while  loop test. It has no augmenting paths, and the flow f  shown in (e) is therefore a maximum flow .
The value of the maximum flow found is 23.
Page number: 811
Figur e 24.7 (a)  A flow network for which F ORD -F ULKERSON  can take Θ( E  | f *|) time, where f * is
a maximum flow , shown here with | f *| = 2,000,000. The blue path is an augmenting path with
residual capacity 1. (b)  The resulting residual network, with another augmenting path whose residual
capacity is 1. (c)  The resulting residual network.
In practice, the maximum-flow problem often arises with integer
capacities. If the capacities are rational numbers, an appropriate scaling
transformation can make them all integers. If f * denotes a maximum flow in
the transformed network, then a straightforward implementation of F ORD -
F ULKERSON  executes the while  loop of lines 3–8 at most | f *| times, since the
flow value increases by at least 1 unit in each iteration.
A good implementation should perform the work done within the while
loop ef ficiently . It should represent the flow network G  = ( V , E ) with the
right data structure and find an augmenting path by a linear -time algorithm.
Let’ s assume that the implementation keeps a data structure corresponding
to a directed graph G ′ = ( V , E ′), where E ′ = {( u , v ) : ( u , v ) ∈  E  or ( v , u ) ∈
E }. Edges in the network G  are also edges in G ′, making it straightforward
to maintain capacities and flows in this data structure. Given a flow f  on G ,
the edges in the residual network Gf  consist of all edges ( u , v ) of G ′ such
that cf  ( u , v ) > 0, where cf  conforms to equation (24.2). The time to find a
path in a residual network is therefore O ( V  + E ′) = O ( E ) using either depth-
first search or breadth-first search. Each iteration of the while  loop thus
takes O ( E ) time, as does the initialization in lines 1–2, making the total
running time of the F ORD -F ULKERSON  algorithm O ( E  | f *|).
When the capacities are integers and the optimal flow value | f *| is small,
the running time of the Ford-Fulkerson algorithm is good. Figure 24.7(a)
shows an example of what can happen on a simple flow network for which
| f *| is lar ge. A maximum flow in this network has value 2,000,000:
1,000,000 units of flow traverse the path s  → u  → t , and another 1,000,000
units traverse the path s  → v  → t . If the first augmenting path found by
Page number: 812
F ORD -F ULKERSON  is s  → u  → v  → t , shown in Figure 24.7(a) , the flow has
value 1 after the first iteration. The resulting residual network appears in
Figure 24.7(b) . If the second iteration finds the augmenting path s  → v  → u
→ t , as shown in Figure 24.7(b) , the flow then has value 2. Figure 24.7(c)
shows the resulting residual network. If the algorithm continues alternately
choosing the augmenting paths s  → u  → v  → t  and s  → v  → u  → t , it
performs a total of 2,000,000 augmentations, increasing the flow value by
only 1 unit in each.
The Edmonds-Karp algorithm
In the example of Figure 24.7 , the algorithm never chooses the augmenting
path with the fewest edges. It should have. By using breadth-first search to
find an augmenting path in the residual network, the algorithm runs in
polynomial time, independent of the maximum flow value. W e call the
Ford-Fulkerson method so implemented the Edmonds-Karp algorithm .
Let’ s now prove that the Edmonds-Karp algorithm runs in O ( VE2) time.
The analysis depends on the distances to vertices in the residual network Gf .
The notation δf  ( u , v ) denotes the shortest-path distance from u  to v  in Gf ,
where each edge has unit distance.
Lemma 24.7
If the Edmonds-Karp algorithm is run on a flow network G  = ( V , E ) with
source s  and sink t , then for all vertices v  ∈  V  − { s , t }, the shortest-path
distance δf  ( s , v ) in the residual network Gf  increases monotonically with
each flow augmentation.
Proof    W e’ll suppose that a flow augmentation occurs that causes the
shortest-path distance from s  to some vertex v  ∈  V  − { s , t } to decrease and
then derive a contradiction. Let f  be the flow just before an augmentation
that decreases some shortest-path distance, and let f ′ be the flow just
afterward. Let v  be a vertex with the minimum δf′  ( s , v ) whose distance was
decreased by the augmentation, so that δf ′ ( s , v ) < δf  ( s , v ). Let p  = s  ⇝  u  →
v  be a shortest path from s  to v  in Gf ′, so that ( u , v ) ∈  Ef ′ and

Page number: 813
Because of how we chose v , we know that the distance of vertex u  from the
source s  did not decrease, that is,
W e claim that ( u , v ) ∉  Ef . Why? If we have ( u , v ) ∈  Ef , then we also have
δ f  ( s , v ) ≤ δ f  ( s , u ) + 1 (by Lemma 22.10, the triangle inequality)
≤ δ f ′ ( s , u ) + 1 (by inequality (24.12))
= δ f ′ ( s , v ) (by equation (24.1 1)),
which contradicts our assumption that δf ′  ( s , v ) < δf  ( s , v ).
How can we have ( u , v ) ∉  Ef  and ( u , v ) ∈  Ef ′ ? The augmentation must
have increased the flow from v  to u , so that edge ( v , u ) was in the
augmenting path. The augmenting path was a shortest path from s  to t  in Gf ,
and since any subpath of a shortest path is itself a shortest path, this
augmenting path includes a shortest path from s  to u  in Gf  that has ( v , u ) as
its last edge. Therefore,
δ f  ( s , v ) = δ f  ( s , u ) − 1
≤ δ f ′  ( s , u ) − 1 (by inequality (24.12))
= δ f ′  ( s , v ) − 2 (by equation (24.1 1)),
so that δf ′  ( s , v ) > δf  ( s , v ), contradicting our assumption that δf ′  ( s , v ) < δf  ( s ,
v ). W e conclude that our assumption that such a vertex v  exists is incorrect.
▪
The next theorem bounds the number of iterations of the Edmonds-Karp
algorithm.
Theorem 24.8
If the Edmonds-Karp algorithm is run on a flow network G  = ( V , E ) with
source s  and sink t , then the total number of flow augmentations performed
by the algorithm is O ( VE ).
Proof    W e say that an edge ( u , v ) in a residual network Gf  is critical  on an
augmenting path p  if the residual capacity of p  is the residual capacity of ( u ,
v ), that is, if cf  ( p ) = cf  ( u , v ). After flow is augmented along an augmenting
path, any critical edge on the path disappears from the residual network.
Page number: 814
Moreover , at least one edge on any augmenting path must be critical. W e’ll
show that each of the | E | edges can become critical at most | V |/2 times.
Let u  and v  be vertices in V  that are connected by an edge in E . Since
augmenting paths are shortest paths, when ( u , v ) is critical for the first time,
we have
δf  ( s , v ) = δf  ( s , u ) + 1.
Once the flow is augmented, the edge ( u , v ) disappears from the residual
network. It cannot reappear later on another augmenting path until after the
flow from u  to v  is decreased, which occurs only if ( v , u ) appears on an
augmenting path. If f  ′ is the flow in G  when this event occurs, then we have
δf ′  ( s , u ) = δf ′  ( s , v ) + 1.
Since δf  ( s , v ) ≤ δf ′  ( s , v ) by Lemma 24.7, we have
δ f ′  ( s , u ) = δ f ′  ( s , v ) + 1
≥ δ f  ( s , v ) + 1
= δ f  ( s , u ) + 2.
Consequently , from the time ( u , v ) becomes critical to the time when it
next becomes critical, the distance of u  from the source increases by at least
2. The distance of u  from the source is initially at least 0. Because edge ( u ,
v ) is on an augmenting path, and augmenting paths end at t , we know that u
cannot be t , so that in any residual network that has a path from s  to u , the
shortest such path has at most | V | − 2 edges. Thus, after the first time that
( u , v ) becomes critical, it can become critical at most (| V | − 2)/2 = | V |/2 − 1
times more, for a total of at most | V |/2 times. Since there are O ( E ) pairs of
vertices that can have an edge between them in a residual network, the total
number of critical edges during the entire execution of the Edmonds-Karp
algorithm is O ( VE ). Each augmenting path has at least one critical edge,
and hence the theorem follows.
▪
Because each iteration of F ORD -F ULKERSON  takes O ( E ) time when it uses
breadth-first search to find the augmenting path, the total running time of
the Edmonds-Karp algorithm is O ( VE2).
Exer cises
Page number: 815
24.2-1
Prove that the summations in equation (24.6) equal the summations on the
right-hand side of equation (24.5).
24.2-2
In Figure 24.1(b) , what is the net flow across the cut ({ s , v2 , v4 }, { v1 , v3 ,
t })? What is the capacity of this cut?
24.2-3
Show the execution of the Edmonds-Karp algorithm on the flow network of
Figure 24.1(a) .
24.2-4
In the example of Figure 24.6 , what is the minimum cut corresponding to
the maximum flow shown? Of the augmenting paths appearing in the
example, which one cancels flow?
24.2-5
The construction in Section 24.1  to convert a flow network with multiple
sources and sinks into a single-source, single-sink network adds edges with
infinite capacity . Prove that any flow in the resulting network has a finite
value if the edges of the original network with multiple sources and sinks
have finite capacity .
24.2-6
Suppose that each source si  in a flow network with multiple sources and
sinks produces exactly pi  units of flow , so that Σv ∈ V  f  ( si , v ) = pi . Suppose
also that each sink tj  consumes exactly qj  units, so that Σv ∈ V  f  ( v , tj ) = qj ,
where Σi  pi  = Σj  qj . Show how to convert the problem of finding a flow f
that obeys these additional constraints into the problem of finding a
maximum flow in a single-source, single-sink flow network.
24.2-7
Prove Lemma 24.2.
24.2-8
Suppose that we redefine the residual network to disallow edges into s .
Ar gue that the procedure F ORD -F ULKERSON  still correctly computes a
Page number: 816
maximum flow .
24.2-9
Suppose that both f  and f  ′ are flows in a flow network. Does the augmented
flow f  ↑ f  ′ satisfy the flow conservation property? Does it satisfy the
capacity constraint?
24.2-10
Show how to find a maximum flow in a flow network G  = ( V , E ) by a
sequence of at most | E | augmenting paths. ( Hint:  Determine the paths after
finding the maximum flow .)
24.2-1 1
The edge connectivity  of an undirected graph is the minimum number k  of
edges that must be removed to disconnect the graph. For example, the edge
connectivity of a tree is 1, and the edge connectivity of a cyclic chain of
vertices is 2. Show how to determine the edge connectivity of an undirected
graph G  = ( V , E ) by running a maximum-flow algorithm on at most | V | flow
networks, each having O ( V  + E ) vertices and O ( E ) edges.
24.2-12
Y ou are given a flow network G , where G  contains edges entering the
source s . Let f  be a flow in G  with | f | ≥ 0 in which one of the edges ( v , s )
entering the source has f  ( v , s ) = 1. Prove that there must exist another flow
f  ′ with f  ′( v , s ) = 0 such that | f | = | f ′|. Give an O ( E )-time algorithm to
compute f ′, given f  and assuming that all edge capacities are integers.
24.2-13
Suppose that you wish to find, among all minimum cuts in a flow network
G  with integer capacities, one that contains the smallest number of edges.
Show how to modify the capacities of G  to create a new flow network G ′ in
which any minimum cut in G ′ is a minimum cut with the smallest number
of edges in G .
24.3    Maximum bipartite matching
Some combinatorial problems can be cast as maximum-flow problems,
such as the multiple-source, multiple-sink maximum-flow problem from
Page number: 817
Section 24.1 . Other combinatorial problems seem on the surface to have
little to do with flow networks, but they can in fact be reduced to
maximum-flow problems. This section presents one such problem: finding
a maximum matching in a bipartite graph. In order to solve this problem,
we’ll take advantage of an integrality property provided by the Ford-
Fulkerson method. W e’ll also see how to use the Ford-Fulkerson method to
solve the maximum-bipartite-matching problem on a graph G  = ( V , E ) in
O ( VE ) time. Section 25.1  will present an algorithm specifically designed to
solve this problem.
The maximum-bipartite-matching pr oblem
Given an undirected graph G  = ( V , E ), a matching  is a subset of edges M  ⊆
E  such that for all vertices v  ∈  V , at most one edge of M  is incident on v .
W e say that a vertex v  ∈  V  is matched  by the matching M  if some edge in
M  is incident on v , and otherwise, v  is unmatched . A maximum matching
is a matching of maximum cardinality , that is, a matching M  such that for
any matching M ′, we have | M | ≥ | M ′|. In this section, we restrict our
attention to finding maximum matchings in bipartite graphs: graphs in
which the vertex set can be partitioned into V  = L  ∪  R , where L  and R  are
disjoint and all edges in E  go between L  and R . W e further assume that
every vertex in V  has at least one incident edge. Figure 24.8  illustrates the
notion of a matching in a bipartite graph.
The problem of finding a maximum matching in a bipartite graph has
many practical applications. As an example, consider matching a set L  of
machines with a set R  of tasks to be performed simultaneously . An edge ( u ,
v ) in E  signifies that a particular machine u  ∈  L  is capable of performing a
particular task v  ∈  R . A maximum matching provides work for as many
machines as possible.
Page number: 818
Figur e 24.8  A bipartite graph G  = ( V , E ) with vertex partition V  = L  ∪  R . (a)  A matching with
cardinality 2, indicated by blue edges. (b)  A maximum matching with cardinality 3. (c)  The
corresponding flow network G ′ with a maximum flow shown. Each edge has unit capacity . Blue
edges have a flow of 1, and all other edges carry no flow . The blue edges from L  to R  correspond to
those in the maximum matching from (b).
Finding a maximum bipartite matching
The Ford-Fulkerson method provides a basis for finding a maximum
matching in an undirected bipartite graph G  = ( V , E ) in time polynomial in
| V | and | E |. The trick is to construct a flow network in which flows
correspond to matchings, as shown in Figure 24.8(c) . W e define the
corresponding flow network  G ′ = ( V ′, E ′) for the bipartite graph G  as
follows. Let the source s  and sink t  be new vertices not in V , and let V ′ = V
∪  { s , t }. If the vertex partition of G  is V  = L  ∪  R , the directed edges of G ′
are the edges of E , directed from L  to R , along with | V  | new directed edges:
E ′ = {( s , u ) : u  ∈  L }
∪  {( u , v ) : u  ∈  L , v  ∈  R , and ( u , v ) ∈  E }
∪  {( v , t ) : v  ∈  R }.
T o complete the construction, assign unit capacity to each edge in E ′. Since
each vertex in V  has at least one incident edge, | E | ≥ | V |/2. Thus, | E | ≤ | E ′| =
| E | + | V | ≤ 3 | E |, and so | E ′| = Θ( E ).
The following lemma shows that a matching in G  corresponds directly
to a flow in G ’ s corresponding flow network G ′. W e say that a flow f  on a
flow network G  = ( V , E ) is integer-valued  if f  ( u , v ) is an integer for all ( u ,
v ) ∈  V  × V .
Page number: 819
Lemma 24.9
Let G  = ( V , E ) be a bipartite graph with vertex partition V  = L  ∪  R , and let
G ′ = ( V ′, E ′) be its corresponding flow network. If M  is a matching in G ,
then there is an integer -valued flow f  in G ′ with value | f | = | M |. Conversely ,
if f  is an integer -valued flow in G ′, then there is a matching M  in G  with
cardinality | M | = | f | consisting of edges ( u , v ) ∈  E  such that f  ( u , v ) > 0.
Proof    W e first show that a matching M  in G  corresponds to an integer -
valued flow f  in G ′. Define f  as follows. If ( u , v ) ∈  M , then f  ( s , u ) = f  ( u , v )
= f  ( v , t ) = 1. For all other edges ( u , v ) ∈  E ′, define f  ( u , v ) = 0. It is simple
to verify that f  satisfies the capacity constraint and flow conservation.
Intuitively , each edge ( u , v ) ∈  M  corresponds to 1 unit of flow in G ′ that
traverses the path s  → u  → v  → t . Moreover , the paths induced by edges in
M  are vertex-disjoint, except for s  and t . The net flow across cut ( L  ∪  { s }, R
∪  { t }) is equal to | M |, and thus, by Lemma 24.4, the value of the flow is | f | =
| M |.
T o prove the converse, let f  be an integer -valued flow in G ′ and, as in the
statement of the lemma, let
M  = {( u , v ) : u  ∈  L , v  ∈  R , and f  ( u , v ) > 0}.
Each vertex u  ∈  L  has only one entering edge, namely ( s , u ), and its
capacity is 1. Thus, each u  ∈  L  has at most 1 unit of flow entering it, and if
1 unit of flow does enter , by flow conservation, 1 unit of flow must leave.
Furthermore, since the flow f  is integer -valued, for each u  ∈  L , the 1 unit of
flow can enter on at most one edge and can leave on at most one edge.
Thus, 1 unit of flow enters u  if and only if there is exactly one vertex v  ∈  R
such that f  ( u , v ) = 1, and at most one edge leaving each u  ∈  L  carries
positive flow . A symmetric ar gument applies to each v  ∈  R . The set M  is
therefore a matching.
T o see that | M | = | f |, observe that of the edges ( u , v ) ∈  E ′ such that u  ∈  L
and v  ∈  R ,
Consequently , f  ( L  ∪  { s }, R  ∪  { t }), the net flow across cut ( L  ∪  { s }, R  ∪
{ t }), is equal to | M |. Lemma 24.4 gives that | f | = f  ( L  ∪  { s }, R  ∪  { t }) = | M |.
▪
Page number: 820
Based on Lemma 24.9, we would like to conclude that a maximum
matching in a bipartite graph G  corresponds to a maximum flow in its
corresponding flow network G ′, and therefore running a maximum-flow
algorithm on G ′ provides a maximum matching in G . The only hitch in this
reasoning is that the maximum-flow algorithm might return a flow in G ′ for
which some f  ( u , v ) is not an integer , even though the flow value | f | must be
an integer . The following theorem shows that the Ford-Fulkerson method
cannot produce a solution with this problem.
Theorem 24.10 (Integrality theorem)
If the capacity function c  takes on only integer values, then the maximum
flow f  produced by the Ford-Fulkerson method has the property that | f | is an
integer . Moreover , for all vertices u  and v , the value of f  ( u , v ) is an integer .
Proof    Exercise 24.3-2 asks you to provide the proof by induction on the
number of iterations.
▪
W e can now prove the following corollary to Lemma 24.9.
Corollary 24.1 1
The cardinality of a maximum matching M  in a bipartite graph G  equals the
value of a maximum flow f  in its corresponding flow network G ′.
Proof    W e use the nomenclature from Lemma 24.9. Suppose that M  is a
maximum matching in G  and that the corresponding flow f  in G ′ is not
maximum. Then there is a maximum flow f ′ in G ′ such that | f ′| > | f |. Since
the capacities in G ′ are integer -valued, by Theorem 24.10, we can assume
that f ′ is integer -valued. Thus, f ′ corresponds to a matching M ′ in G  with
cardinality | M ′| = | f ′| > | f | = | M |, contradicting our assumption that M  is a
maximum matching. In a similar manner , we can show that if f  is a
maximum flow in G ′, its corresponding matching is a maximum matching
on G .
▪
Thus, to find a maximum matching in a bipartite undirected graph G ,
create the flow network G ′, run the Ford-Fulkerson method on G ′, and
convert the integer -valued maximum flow found into a maximum matching
for G . Since any matching in a bipartite graph has cardinality at most min
Page number: 821
{| L |, | R |} = O ( V ), the value of the maximum flow in G ′ is O ( V ). Therefore,
finding a maximum matching in a bipartite graph takes O ( VE ′) = O ( VE )
time, since | E ′| = Θ( E ).
Exer cises
24.3-1
Run the Ford-Fulkerson algorithm on the flow network in Figure 24.8(c)
and show the residual network after each flow augmentation. Number the
vertices in L  top to bottom from 1 to 5 and in R  top to bottom from 6 to 9.
For each iteration, pick the augmenting path that is lexicographically
smallest.
24.3-2
Prove Theorem 24.10. Use induction on the number of iterations of the
Ford-Fulkerson method.
24.3-3
Let G  = ( V , E ) be a bipartite graph with vertex partition V  = L  ∪  R , and let
G ′ be its corresponding flow network. Give a good upper bound on the
length of any augmenting path found in G ′ during the execution of F ORD -
F ULKERSON .
Pr oblems
24-1     Escape problem
An n × n  grid  is an undirected graph consisting of n  rows and n  columns of
vertices, as shown in Figure 24.9 . W e denote the vertex in the i th row and
the j  th column by ( i , j ). All vertices in a grid have exactly four neighbors,
except for the boundary vertices, which are the points ( i , j ) for which i  = 1, i
= n , j  = 1, or j  = n .
Given m  ≤ n2 starting points ( x1 , y1 ), ( x2 , y2 ), …, ( xm , ym ) in the grid, the
escape problem  is to determine whether there are m  vertex-disjoint paths
from the starting points to any m  dif ferent points on the boundary . For
example, the grid in Figure 24.9(a)  has an escape, but the grid in Figure
24.9(b)  does not.
Page number: 822
Figur e 24.9  Grids for the escape problem. Starting points are blue, and other grid vertices are tan. (a)
A grid with an escape, shown by blue paths. (b)  A grid with no escape.
a.  Consider a flow network in which vertices, as well as edges, have
capacities. That is, the total positive flow entering any given vertex is
subject to a capacity constraint. Show how to reduce the problem of
determining the maximum flow in a network with edge and vertex
capacities to an ordinary maximum-flow problem on a flow network of
comparable size.
b.  Describe an ef ficient algorithm to solve the escape problem, and analyze
its running time.
24-2     Minimum path cover
A path cover  of a directed graph G  = ( V , E ) is a set P  of vertex-disjoint
paths such that every vertex in V  is included in exactly one path in P . Paths
may start and end anywhere, and they may be of any length, including 0. A
minimum path cover  of G  is a path cover containing the fewest possible
paths.
a.  Give an ef ficient algorithm to find a minimum path cover of a directed
acyclic graph G  = ( V , E ). ( Hint:  Assuming that V  = {1, 2, …, n },
construct a flow network based on the graph G ′ = ( V ′, E ′), where
V ′ = { x0 , x1 , …, xn } ∪  { y0 , y1 , …, yn },
E ′ = {( x0 , xi ) : i  ∈  V  } ∪  {( yi , y0 ) : i  ∈  V  } ∪  {( xi , yj ) : ( i , j ) ∈  E },
and run a maximum-flow algorithm.)
b.  Does your algorithm work for directed graphs that contain cycles?
Explain.
Page number: 823
24-3     Hiring consulting experts
Professor Fieri wants to open a consulting company for the food industry .
He has identified n  important food categories, which he represents by the
set C  = { C1 , C2 , …, Cn }. In each category Ck , he can hire an expert in that
category for ek  > 0 dollars. The consulting company has lined up a set J  =
{ J1 , J2 , …, Jm } of potential jobs. In order to perform job Ji , the company
needs to have hired experts in a subset Ri  ⊆  C  of categories. Each expert
can work on multiple jobs simultaneously . If the company chooses to accept
job Ji , it must have hired experts in all categories in Ri , and it takes in
revenue of pi  > 0 dollars.
Professor Fieri’ s job is to determine which categories to hire experts in
and which jobs to accept in order to maximize the net revenue, which is the
total income from jobs accepted minus the total cost of employing the
experts.
Consider the following flow network G . It contains a source vertex s ,
vertices C1 , C2 , …, Cn , vertices J1 , J2 , …, Jm , and a sink vertex t . For k  = 1,
2 …, n , the flow network contains an edge ( s , Ck ) with capacity c ( s , Ck ) =
ek , and for i  = 1, 2, …, m , the flow network contains an edge ( Ji , t ) with
capacity c ( Ji , t ) = pi . For k  = 1, 2, …, n  and i  = 1, 2, …, m , if Ck  ∈  Ri , then
G  contains an edge ( Ck , Ji ) with capacity c ( Ck , Ji ) = ∞.
a.  Show that if Ji  ∈  T  for a finite-capacity cut ( S , T ) of G , then Ck  ∈  T  for
each Ck  ∈  Ri .
b.  Show how to determine the maximum net revenue from the capacity of a
minimum cut of G  and the given pi  values.
c.  Give an ef ficient algorithm to determine which jobs to accept and which
experts to hire. Analyze the running time of your algorithm in terms of m ,
n , and 
 .
24-4     Updating maximum flow
Let G  = ( V , E ) be a flow network with source s , sink t , and integer
capacities. Suppose that you are given a maximum flow in G .
Page number: 824
a.  Suppose that the capacity of a single edge ( u , v ) ∈  E  increases by 1. Give
an O ( V  + E )-time algorithm to update the maximum flow .
b.  Suppose that the capacity of a single edge ( u , v ) ∈  E  decreases by 1.
Give an O ( V  + E )-time algorithm to update the maximum flow .
24-5     Maximum flow by scaling
Let G  = ( V , E ) be a flow network with source s , sink t , and an integer
capacity c ( u , v ) on each edge ( u , v ) ∈  E . Let C  = max { c ( u , v ) : ( u , v ) ∈  E }.
a.  Ar gue that a minimum cut of G  has capacity at most C  | E |.
b.  For a given number K , show how to find an augmenting path of capacity
at least K  in O ( E ) time, if such a path exists.
The procedure M AX -F LOW -B Y -S CALING  appearing on the following page
modifies the basic F ORD -F ULKERSON -M ETHOD  procedure to compute a
maximum flow in G .
c.  Ar gue that M AX -F LOW -B Y -S CALING  returns a maximum flow .
d.  Show that the capacity of a minimum cut of the residual network Gf  is
less than 2 K  | E | each time line 4 executes.
e.  Ar gue that the inner while  loop of lines 5–6 executes O ( E ) times for each
value of K .
M AX -F LOW -B Y -S CALING  ( G , s , t )
1 C  = max { c ( u , v ) : ( u , v ) ∈  E }
2 initialize flow f  to 0
3K  = 2⌊ lg C ⌋
4 while  K  ≥ 1
5 while  there exists an augmenting path p  of capacity at least K
6 augment flow f  along p
7 K  = K /2
8 r eturn  f
f.  Conclude that M AX -F LOW -B Y -S CALING  can be implemented so that it runs
in O ( E2 lg C ) time.
24-6     W idest augmenting path
Page number: 825
The Edmonds-Karp algorithm implements the Ford-Fulkerson algorithm by
always choosing a shortest augmenting path in the residual network.
Suppose instead that the Ford-Fulkerson algorithm chooses a widest
augmenting path : an augmenting path with the greatest residual capacity .
Assume that G  = ( V , E ) is a flow network with source s  and sink t , that all
capacities are integer , and that the lar gest capacity is C . In this problem, you
will show that choosing a widest augmenting path results in at most | E | ln
| f *| augmentations to find a maximum flow f *.
a.  Show how to adjust Dijkstra’ s algorithm to find the widest augmenting
path in the residual network.
b.  Show that a maximum flow in G  can be formed by successive flow
augmentations along at most | E | paths from s  to t .
c.  Given a flow f , ar gue that the residual network Gf  has an augmenting path
p  with residual capacity cf  ( p ) ≥ (| f *| − | f |)/| E |.
d.  Assuming that each augmenting path is a widest augmenting path, let fi
be the flow after augmenting the flow by the i th augmenting path, where
f0  has f  ( u , v ) = 0 for all edges ( u , v ). Show that | f *| − | fi | ≤ | f *| (1 − 1/| E |)i.
e.  Show that | f * | − | fi | < | f *| e− i /| E |.
f.  Conclude that after the flow is augmented at most | E | ln | f *| times, the
flow is a maximum flow .
24-7     Global minimum cut
A global cut  in an undirected graph G  = ( V , E ) is a partition (see page 1 156)
of V  into two nonempty sets V1  and V2 . This definition is like the definition
of cut that we have used in this chapter , except that we no longer have
distinguished vertices s  and t . Any edge ( u , v ) with u  ∈  V1  and v  ∈  V2  is
said to cross  the cut.
W e can extend this definition of a cut to a multigraph G  = ( V , E ) (see
page 1 167), and we denote by c ( u , v ) the number of edges in the multigraph
with endpoints u  and v . A global cut in a multigraph is still a partition of the
vertices, and the value of a global cut ( V1 , V2 ) is 
. A solution to the global-minimum-cut
Page number: 826
problem  is a cut ( V1 , V2 ) such that c ( V1 , V2 ) is minimum. Let μ ( G ) denote
the value of a global minimum cut in a graph or multigraph G .
a.  Show how to find a global minimum cut of a graph G  = ( V , E ) by solving
 maximum-flow problems, each with a dif ferent pair of vertices as the
source and sink, and taking the mininum value of the cuts found.
b.  Give an algorithm to find a global minimum cut by solving only Θ( V )
maximum-flow problems. What is the running time of your algorithm?
The remainder of this problem develops an algorithm for the global-
minimum-cut problem that does not use any maximum-flow computations.
It uses the notion of an edge contraction, defined on page 1 168, with one
crucial dif ference. The algorithm maintains a multigraph, so that upon
contracting an edge ( u , v ), it creates a new vertex x , and for any other vertex
y  ∈  V , the number of edges between x  and y  is c ( u , y ) + c ( v , y ). The
algorithm does not maintain self-loops, and so it sets c ( x , x ) to 0. Denote by
G /( u , v ) the multigraph that results from contracting edge ( u , v ) in
multigraph G .
Consider what can happen to the minimum cut when an edge is
contracted. Assume that, at all points, the minimum cut in a multigraph G  is
unique. W e’ll remove this assumption later .
c.  Show that for any edge ( u , v ), we have μ ( G /( u , v )) ≤ μ ( G ). Under what
conditions is μ ( G /( u , v )) < μ ( G )?
Next, you will show that if you pick an edge uniformly at random, the
probability that it belongs to the minimum cut is small.
d.  Show that for any multigraph G  = ( V , E ), the value of the global
minimum cut is at most the average degree of a vertex: that μ ( G ) ≤ 2
| E |/| V |, where | E | denotes the total number of edges in the multigraph.
e.  Using the results from parts (c) and (d), show that, if we pick an edge ( u ,
v ) uniformly at random, then the probability that ( u , v ) belongs to the
minimum cut is at most 2/ V .
Consider the algorithm that repeatedly chooses an edge at random and
contracts it until the multigraph has exactly two vertices, say u  and v . At
that point, the multigraph corresponds to a cut in the original graph, with
vertex u  representing all the nodes in one side of the original graph, and v
Page number: 827
representing all the vertices on the other side. The number of edges given
by c ( u , v ) corresponds exactly to the number of edges crossing the
corresponding cut in the original graph. W e call this algorithm the
contraction algorithm .
f.  Suppose that the contraction algorithm terminates with a multigraph
whose only vertices are u  and v . Show that 
 .
g.  Prove that if the contraction algorithm repeats 
  times, then the
probability that at least one of the runs returns the minimum cut is at least
1 − 1/| V |.
h.  Give a detailed implementation of the contraction algorithm that runs in
O ( V2) time.
i.  Combine the previous parts and remove the assumption that the minimum
cut must be unique, to conclude that running the contraction algorithm 
 times yields an algorithm that runs in O ( V4 lg V ) time and returns
a minimum cut with probability at least 1 − 1/ V .
Chapter notes
Ahuja, Magnanti, and Orlin [ 7 ], Even [ 137 ], Lawler [ 276 ], Papadimitriou
and Steiglitz [ 353 ], T arjan [ 429 ], and W illiamson [ 458 ] are good references
for network flows and related algorithms. Schrijver [ 399 ] has written an
interesting review of historical developments in the field of network flows.
The Ford-Fulkerson method is due to Ford and Fulkerson [ 149 ], who
originated the formal study of many of the problems in the area of network
flow , including the maximum-flow and bipartite-matching problems. Many
early implementations of the Ford-Fulkerson method found augmenting
paths using breadth-first search. Edmonds and Karp [ 132 ], and
independently Dinic [ 1 19 ], proved that this strategy yields a polynomial-
time algorithm. A related idea, that of using “blocking flows,” was also first
developed by Dinic [ 1 19 ].
A class of algorithms known as push-relabel algorithms , due to
Goldber g [ 185 ] and Goldber g and T arjan [ 188 ], takes a dif ferent approach
from the Ford-Fulkerson method. Push-relabel algorithms allow flow
conservation to be violated at vertices other than the source and sink as they
Page number: 828
execute. Using an idea first developed by Karzonov [ 251 ], they allow a
preflow  in which the flow into a vertex may exceed the flow out of the
vertex. Such a vertex is said to be overflowing . Initially , every edge leaving
the source is filled to capacity , so that all neighbors of the source are
overflowing. In a push-relabel algorithm, each vertex is assigned an integer
height. An overflowing vertex may push flow to a neighboring vertex to
which it has a residual edge provided that it is higher than the neighbor . If
all residual edges from an overflowing vertex go to neighbors with equal or
greater heights, then the vertex may increase its height. Once all vertices
other than the sink are no longer overflowing, the preflow is not only a legal
flow , but also a maximum flow .
Goldber g and T arjan [ 188 ] gave an O ( V3)-time algorithm that uses a
queue to maintain the set of overflowing vertices, as well as an algorithm
that uses dynamic trees to achieve a running time of O ( VE  lg( V2/ E  + 2)).
Several other researchers developed improved variants and implementations
[ 9 , 10 , 15 , 86 , 87 , 255 , 358 ], the fastest of which, by King, Rao, and T arjan
[ 255 ], runs in O ( VE  logE /( V  lg V )  V ) time.
Another ef ficient algorithm for maximum flow , by Goldber g and Rao
[ 187 ], runs in O  (min{ V2/3, E1/2} E  lg ( V2/ E  + 2) lg C ) time, where C  is the
maximum capacity any edge. Orlin [ 350 ] gave an algorithm in the same
spirit as this algorithm that runs in O ( VE  + E31/16 lg2 V ) time. Combining it
with the algorithm of King, Rao, and T arjan results in an O ( VE )-time
algorithm.
A dif ferent approach to maximum flows and related problems is to use
techniques from continuous optimization including electrical flows and
interior -point methods. The first breakthrough in this line of work is due to
Madry [ 308 ], who gave an Õ ( E10/7)-time algorithm for unit-capacity
maximum flow and bipartite maximum matching. (See Problem 3-6 on
page 73 for a definition of Õ .) There has been a series of papers in this area
for matchings, maximum flows, and minimum-cost flows. The fastest
algorithm to date in this line of work for maximum flow is due to Lee and
Sidford [ 285 ], taking 
  time. If the capacities are not too lar ge,
this algorithm is faster than the O ( VE )-time algorithm mentioned above.
Another algorithm, due to Liu and Sidford [ 303 ] runs in Õ ( E1 1/8C1/4) time,
where C  is the maximum capacity of any edge. This algorithm does not run
Page number: 829
in polynomial time, but for small enough capacities, it is faster than the
previous ones.
In practice, push-relabel algorithms currently dominate algorithms based
on augmenting paths, continuous-optimization, and linear programming for
the maximum-flow problem [ 88 ].
1 Recall from Section 20.1  that we represent an attribute f  for edge ( u , v ) with the same style of
notation—( u , v ). f —that we use for an attribute of any other object.
Page number: 830
25        Matchings in Bipartite Graphs
Many real-world problems can be modeled as finding matchings in an
undirected graph. For an undirected graph G  = ( V , E ), a matching  is a
subset of edges M  ⊆  E  such that every vertex in V  has at most one incident
edge in M .
For example, consider the following scenario. Y ou have one or more
positions to fill and several candidates to interview . According to your
schedule, you are able to interview candidates at certain time slots. Y ou ask
the candidates to indicate the subsets of time slots at which they are
available. How can you schedule the interviews so that each time slot has at
most one candidate scheduled, while maximizing the number of candidates
that you can interview? Y ou can model this scenario as a matching problem
on a bipartite graph in which each vertex represents either a candidate or a
time slot, with an edge between a candidate and a time slot if the candidate
is available then. If an edge is included in the matching, that means you are
scheduling a particular candidate for a particular time slot. Y our goal is to
find a maximum matching : a matching of maximum cardinality . One of the
authors of this book was faced with exactly this situation when hiring
teaching assistants for a lar ge class. He used the Hopcroft-Karp algorithm in
Section 25.1  to schedule the interviews.
Another application of matching is the U.S. National Resident Matching
Program, in which medical students are matched to hospitals where they
will be stationed as medical residents. Each student ranks the hospitals by
preference, and each hospital ranks the students. The goal is to assign
students to hospitals so that there is never a student and a hospital that both
have regrets because the student was not assigned to the hospital, yet each
ranked the other higher than who or where they were assigned. This
Page number: 831
scenario is perhaps the best-known real-world example of the “stable-
marriage problem,” which Section 25.2  examines.
Y et another instance where matching comes into play occurs when
workers must be assigned to tasks in order to maximize the overall
ef fectiveness of the assignment. For each worker and each task, the worker
has some quantified ef fectiveness for that task. Assuming that there are
equal numbers of workers and tasks, the goal is to find a matching with the
maximum total ef fectiveness. Such a situation is an example of an
assignment problem, which Section 25.3  shows how to solve.
The algorithms in this chapter find matchings in bipartite  graphs. As in
Section 24.3 , the input is an undirected graph G  = ( V , E ), where V  = L  ∪  R ,
the vertex sets L  and R  are disjoint, and every edge in E  is incident on one
vertex in L  and one vertex in R . A matching, therefore, matches vertices in
L  with vertices in R . In some applications, the sets L  and R  have equal
cardinality , and in other applications they need not be the same size.
An undirected graph need not be bipartite for the concept of matching to
apply . Matching in general undirected graphs has applications in areas such
as scheduling and computational chemistry . It models problems in which
you want to pair up entities, represented by vertices. T wo vertices are
adjacent if they represent compatible entities, and you need to find a lar ge
set of compatible pairs. Maximum-matching and maximum-weight
matching problems on general graphs can be solved by polynomial-time
algorithms whose running times are similar to those for bipartite matching,
but the algorithms are significantly more complicated. Exercise 25.2-5
discusses the general version of the stable-marriage problem, known as the
“stable-roommates problem.” Although matching applies to general
undirected graphs, this chapter deals only with bipartite graphs.
25.1    Maximum bipartite matching (r evisited)
Section 24.3  demonstrated one way to find a maximum matching in a
bipartite graph, by finding a maximum flow . This section provides a more
ef ficient method, the Hopcroft-Karp algorithm, which runs in 
  time.
Figure 25.1(a)  shows a matching in an undirected bipartite graph. A vertex
that has an incident edge in matching M  is matched  under M , and
otherwise, it is unmatched . A maximal matching  is a matching M  to which
Page number: 832
no other edges can be added, that is, for every edge e  ∈  E  − M , the edge set
M  ∪  { e } fails to be a matching. A maximum matching is always maximal,
but the reverse does not always hold.
Many algorithms to find maximum matchings, the Hopcroft-Karp
algorithm included, work by incrementally increasing the size of a
matching. Given a matching M  in an undirected graph G  = ( V , E ), an M-
alternating path  is a simple path whose edges alternate between being in M
and being in E  − M . Figure 25.1(b)  depicts an M-augmenting path
(sometimes called an augmenting path with respect to M ): an M -alternating
path whose first and last edges belong to E  − M . Since an M -augmenting
path contains one more edge in E  − M  than in M , it must consist of an odd
number of edges.
Figur e 25.1  A bipartite graph, where V  = L  ∪  R , L  = { l 1 , l 2 , … , l 7 }, and R  = { r 1 , r 2 , … , r 8 }. (a)  A
matching M  with cardinality 4, highlighted in blue. Matched vertices are blue, and unmatched
vertices are tan. (b)  The five edges highlighted in orange form an M -augmenting path P  going
between vertices l 6  and r 8 . (c)  The set of edges M ′ = M  ⊕  P  highlighted in blue is a matching
containing one more edge than M  and adding l 6  and r 8  to the matched vertices. This matching is not
a maximum matching (see Exercise 25.1-1).
Figure 25.1(c)  demonstrates the following lemma, which shows that by
removing from matching M  the edges in an M -augmenting path that belong
Page number: 833
to M  and adding to M  the edges in the M -augmenting path that are not in M ,
the result is a new matching with one more edge than M . Since a matching
is a set of edges, the lemma relies on the notion of the symmetric dif ference
of two sets: X  ⊕  Y  = ( X  − Y ) ∪  ( Y  − X ), that is, the elements that belong to X
or Y , but not both. Alternatively , you can think of X  ⊕  Y  as ( X  ∪  Y )−( X  ∩
Y ). The operator ⊕  is commutative and associative. Furthermore, X  ⊕  X  =
Ø and X  ⊕  Ø = Ø ⊕  X  = X  for any set X , so that the empty set is the identity
for ⊕ .
Lemma 25.1
Let M  be a matching in any undirected graph G  = ( V , E ), and let P  be an M -
augmenting path. Then the set of edges M ′ = M  ⊕  P  is also a matching in G
with | M ′| = | M | + 1.
Proof    Let P  contain q  edges, so that ⌈ q/2 ⌉  edges belong to E  − M  and ⌊ q/2 ⌋
edges belong to M , and let these q  edges be ( v1 , v2 ), ( v2 , v3 ), … , ( vq , vq +1 ).
Because P  is an M -augmenting path, vertices v1  and vq +1  are unmatched
under M  and all other vertices in P  are matched. Edges ( v1 , v2 ), ( v3 , v4 ), … ,
( vq , vq +1 ) belong to E  − M , and edges ( v2 , v3 ), ( v4 , v5 ), … , ( vq −1 , vq ) belong
to M . The symmetric dif ference M ′ = M  ⊕  P  reverses these roles, so that
edges ( v1 , v2 ), ( v3 , v4 ), … , ( vq , vq +1 ) belong to M ′ and ( v2 , v3 ), ( v4 , v5 ), … ,
( vq −1 , vq ) belong to E  − M ′. Each vertex v1 , v2 , … , vq , vq +1  is matched under
M ′, which gains one additional edge relative to M , and no other vertices or
edges in G  are af fected by the change from M  to M ′. Hence, M ′ is a
matching in G , and | M ′| = | M | + 1.
▪
Since taking the symmetric dif ference of a matching M  with an M -
augmenting path increases the size of the matching by 1, the following
corollary shows that taking the symmetric dif ference of M  with k  vertex-
disjoint M -augmenting paths increases the size of the matching by k .
Corollary 25.2
Let M  be a matching in any undirected graph G  = ( V , E ) and P1 , P2 , … , Pk
be vertex-disjoint M -augmenting paths. Then the set of edges M ′ = M  ⊕  ( P1
∪  P2  ∪  … ∪  Pk ) is a matching in G  with | M ′| = | M | + k .
Page number: 834
Proof    Since the M -augmenting paths P1 , P2 , … , Pk  are vertex-disjoint, we
have that P1  ∪  P2  ∪ ⋯ ∪  Pk  = P1 ⊕  P2  ⊕ ⋯ ⊕  Pk . Because the operator ⊕  is
associative, we have
M  ⊕  ( P 1  ∪  P 2  ∪  ⋯  ∪  P k ) = M  ⊕  ( P 1  ⊕  P 2  ⊕  ⋯  ⊕  P k )
= ( ⋯  (( M  ⊕  P 1 ) ⊕  P 2 ) ⊕  ⋯  ⊕  P k −1 ) ⊕  P k .
A simple induction on i  using Lemma 25.1 shows that M  ⊕  ( P1  ∪  P2  ∪  ⋯
∪  Pi −1 ) is a matching in G  containing | M | + i  − 1 edges and that path Pi  is an
augmenting path with respect to M  ⊕  ( P1  ∪  P2  ∪  ⋯  ∪  Pi −1 ). Each of these
augmenting paths increases the size of the matching by 1, and so | M ′| = | M |
+ k .
▪
As the Hopcroft-Karp algorithm goes from matching to matching, it will
be useful to consider the symmetric dif ference between two matchings.
Lemma 25.3
Let M  and M * be matchings in graph G  = ( V , E ), and consider the graph G ′
= ( V , E ′), where E ′ = M  ⊕  M *. Then, G ′ is a disjoint union of simple paths,
simple cycles, and/or isolated vertices. The edges in each such simple path
or simple cycle alternate between M  and M *. If | M *| > | M |, then G ′ contains
at least | M *|−| M | vertex-disjoint M -augmenting paths.
Proof    Each vertex in G ′ has degree 0, 1, or 2, since at most two edges of
E ′ can be incident on a vertex: at most one edge from M  and at most one
edge from M *. Therefore, each connected component of G ′ is either a
singleton vertex, an even-length simple cycle with edges alternately in M
and M *, or a simple path with edges alternately in M  and M *. Since
E ′ = M  ⊕  M *
= ( M  ∪  M *) − ( M  ∩ M *)
and | M *| > | M |, the edge set E ′ must contain | M *| − | M | more edges from M *
than from M . Because each cycle in G ′ has an even number of edges drawn
alternately from M  and M *, each cycle has an equal number of edges from
M  and M *. Therefore, the simple paths in G ′ account for there being | M *| −
| M | more edges from M * than M . Each path containing a dif ferent number
of edges from M  and M * either starts and ends with edges from M ,
Page number: 835
containing one more edge from M  than from M *, or starts and ends with
edges from M *, containing one more edge from M * than from M . Because
E ′ contains | M *| − | M | more edges from M * than from M , there are at least
| M *| − | M | paths of the latter type, and each one is an M -augmenting path.
Because each vertex has at most two incident edges from E ′, these paths
must be vertex-disjoint.
▪
If an algorithm finds a maximum matching by incrementally increasing
the size of the matching, how does it determine when to stop? The
following corollary gives the answer: when there are no augmenting paths.
Corollary 25.4
Matching M  in graph G  = ( V , E ) is a maximum matching if and only if G
contains no M -augmenting path.
Proof    W e prove the contrapositive of both directions of the lemma
statement. The contrapositive of the forward direction is straightforward. If
there is an M -augmenting path P  in G , then by Lemma 25.1, the matching
M  ⊕  P  contains one more edge than M , meaning that M  could not be a
maximum matching.
T o show the contrapositive of the backward direction—if M  is not a
maximum matching, then G  contains an M -augmenting path—let M * be a
maximum matching in Lemma 25.3, so that | M *| > | M |. Then G  contains at
least | M *| − | M | > 0 vertex-disjoint M -augmenting paths.
▪
W e already have learned enough to create a maximum-matching
algorithm that runs in O ( VE ) time. Start with the matching M  empty . Then
repeatedly run a variant of either breadth-first search or depth-first search
from an unmatched vertex that takes alternating paths until you find another
unmatched vertex. Use the resulting M -augmenting path to increase the size
of M  by 1.
The Hopcr oft-Karp algorithm
The Hopcroft-Karp algorithm improves the running time to 
 . The
procedure H OPCROFT -K ARP  is given an undirected bipartite graph, and it
uses Corollary 25.2 to repeatedly increase the size of the matching M  it
finds. Corollary 25.4 proves that the algorithm is correct, since it terminates
Page number: 836
once there are no M -augmenting paths. It remains to show that the
algorithm does run in 
  time. W e’ll see that the r epeat  loop of lines
2–5 iterates 
  times and how to implement line 3 so that it runs in
O ( E ) time in each iteration.
H OPCROFT -K ARP  ( G )
1 M  = Ø
2 r epeat
3 let P  = { P 1 , P 2 , … , P k } be a maximal set of vertex-disjoint shortest M -augmenting paths
4 M  = M  ⊕  ( P 1  ∪  P 2  ∪  ⋯  ∪  P k )
5 until  P  == Ø
6 r eturn  M
Let’ s first see how to find a maximal set of vertex-disjoint shortest M -
augmenting paths in O ( E ) time. There are three phases. The first phase
forms a directed version GM  of the undirected bipartite graph G . The second
phase creates a directed acyclic graph H  from GM  via a variant of breadth-
first search. The third phase finds a maximal set of vertex-disjoint shortest
M -augmenting paths by running a variant of depth-first search on the
transpose HT of H . (Recall that the transpose of a directed graph reverses
the direction of each edge. Since H  is acyclic, so is HT.)
Given a matching M , you can think of an M -augmenting path P  as
starting at an unmatched vertex in L , traversing an odd number of edges,
and ending at an unmatched vertex in R . The edges in P  traversed from L  to
R  must belong to E  − M , and the edges in P  traversed from R  to L  must
belong to M . The first phase, therefore, creates the directed graph GM  by
directing the edges accordingly: GM  = ( V , EM ), where
Page number: 837
Figur e 25.2 (a)  The directed graph G M  created in the first phase for the undirected bipartite graph G
and matching M  in Figure 25.1(a) . Breadth-first distances from any unmatched vertex in L  appear
next to each vertex. (b)  The dag H  created from G M  in the second phase. Because the smallest
distance to an unmatched vertex in R  is 3, vertices l 7  and r 8 , with distances greater than 3, are not in
H .
E M = {( l , r ) : l  ∈  L , r  ∈  R , and ( l , r ) ∈  E  − M  } (edges from L  to R )
∪  {( r , l ) : r  ∈  R , l  ∈  L , and ( l , r ) ∈  M  } (edges from R  to L ).
Figure 25.2(a)  shows the graph GM  for the graph G  and matching M  in
Figure 25.1(a) .
The dag H  = ( VH , EH ) created by the second phase has layers of vertices.
Figure 25.2(b)  shows the dag H  corresponding to the directed graph GM  in
part (a) of the figure. Each layer contains only vertices from L  or only
vertices from R , alternating from layer to layer . The layer that a vertex
resides in is given by that vertex’ s minimum breadth-first distance in GM
from any unmatched vertex in L . V ertices in L  appear in even-numbered
Page number: 838
layers, and vertices in R  appear in odd-numbered layers. Let q  denote the
smallest distance in GM  of any unmatched vertex in R . Then, the last layer
in H  contains the vertices in R  with distance q . V ertices whose distance
exceeds q  do not appear in VH . (The graph H  in Figure 25.2(b)  omits
vertices l7  and r8  because their distances from any unmatched vertex in L
exceed q  = 3.) The edges in EH  form a subset of EM :
EH  = {( l , r ) ∈  EM  : r . d  ≤ q  and r . d  = l . d  + 1} ∪  {( r , l ) ∈  EM  : l . d  ≤ q },
where the attribute d  of a vertex gives the vertex’ s breadth-first distance in
GM  from any unmatched vertex in L . Edges that do not go between two
consecutive layers are omitted from EH .
T o determine the breadth-first distances of vertices, run breadth-first
search on the graph GM , but starting from all the unmatched vertices in L .
(In the BFS procedure on page 556, replace the root vertex s  by the set of
unmatched vertices in L .) The predecessor attributes π  computed by the
BFS procedure are not needed here, since H  is a dag and not necessarily a
tree.
Every path in H  from a vertex in layer 0 to an unmatched vertex in layer
q  corresponds to a shortest M -augmenting path in the original bipartite
graph G . Just use the undirected versions of the directed edges in H .
Moreover , every shortest M -augmenting path in G  is present in H .
The third phase identifies a maximal set of vertex-disjoint shortest M -
augmenting paths. As Figure 25.3  shows, it starts by creating the transpose
HT of H . Then, for each unmatched vertex r  in layer q , it performs a depth-
first search starting from r  until it either reaches a vertex in layer 0 or has
exhausted all possible paths without reaching a vertex in layer 0. Instead of
maintaining discovery and finish times, the depth-first search just needs to
keep track of the predecessor attributes π  in the depth-first tree of each
search. Upon reaching a vertex in layer 0, tracing back along the
predecessors identifies an M -augmenting path. Each vertex is searched from
only when it is first discovered in any search. If the search from a vertex r
in layer q  cannot find a path of undiscovered vertices to an undiscovered
vertex in layer 0, then no M -augmenting path including r  goes into the
maximal set.
Page number: 839
Figure 25.3  shows the result of the third phase. The first depth-first
search starts from vertex r1 . It identifies the M -augmenting path 〈 ( r1 , l3 ), ( l3 ,
r3 ), ( r3 , l1 )〉 , which is highlighted in orange, and discovers vertices r1 , l3 , r3 ,
and l1 . The next depth-first search starts from vertex r4 . This search first
examines the edge ( r4 , l3 ), but because l3  was already discovered, it
backtracks and examines edge ( r4 , l5 ). From there, it continues and
identifies the M -augmenting path 〈 ( r4 , l5 ), ( l5 , r7 ), ( r7 , l6 )〉 , which is
highlighted in yellow , and discovers vertices r4 , l5 , r7 , and l6 . The depth-
first search from vertex r6  gets stuck at vertices l3  and l5 , which have
already been discovered, and so this search fails to find a path of
undiscovered vertices to a vertex in layer 0. There is no depth-first search
from vertex r5  because it is matched, and depth-first searches start from
unmatched vertices. Therefore, the maximal set of vertex-disjoint shortest
M -augmenting paths found contains just the two M -augmenting paths ( 〈 r1 ,
l3 ), ( l3 , r3 ), ( r3 , l1 )〉  and 〈 ( r4 , l5 ), ( l5 , r7 ), ( r7 , l6 )〉 .
Y ou might have noticed that in this example, this maximal set of two
vertex-disjoint shortest M -augmenting paths is not a maximum set. The
graph contains three vertex-disjoint shortest M -augmenting paths: 〈 ( r1 , l2 ),
( l2 , r2 ), ( r2 , l1 )〉 , 〈 ( r4 , l3 ), ( l3 , r3 ), ( r3 , l4 )〉 , and 〈 ( r6 , l5 ), ( l5 , r7 ), ( r7 , l6 )〉 . No
matter: the algorithm requires the set of vertex-disjoint shortest M -
augmenting paths found in line 3 of H OPCROFT -K ARP  to be only maximal,
not necessarily maximum.
Page number: 840
Figur e 25.3  The transpose HT of the dag H  created in the third phase. The first depth-first search,
starting from vertex r 1 , identifies the M -augmenting path 〈 ( r 1 , l 3 ), ( l 3 , r 3 ), ( r 3 , l 1 )〉  highlighted in
orange, and it discovers vertices r 1 , l 3 , r 3 , l 1 . The second depth-first search, starting from vertex r 4 ,
identifies the M -augmenting path 〈 ( r 4 , l 5 ), ( l 5 , r 7 ), ( r 7 , l 6 )〉  highlighted in yellow , discovering
vertices r 4 , l 5 , r 7 , l 6 .
It remains to show that all three phases of line 3 take O ( E ) time. W e
assume that in the original bipartite graph G , each vertex has at least one
incident edge so that | V | = O ( E ), which in turn implies that | V | + | E | = O ( E ).
The first phase creates the directed graph GM  by simply directing each edge
of G , so that | VM | = | V | and | EM  = | E |. The second phase performs a breadth-
first search on GM , taking O ( VM  + EM ) = O ( EM ) = O ( E ) time. In fact, it can
stop once the first distance in the queue within the breadth-first search
exceeds the shortest distance q  to an unmatched vertex in R . The dag H  has
| VH | ≤ | VM | and | EH | ≤ | EM |, so that it takes O ( VH  + EH ) = O ( E ) time to
construct. Finally , the third phase performs depth-first searches from the
unmatched vertices in layer q . Once a vertex is discovered, it is not
searched from again, and so the analysis of depth-first search from Section
20.3  applies here: O ( VH  + EH ) = O ( E ). Hence, all three phases take just
O ( E ) time.
Once the maximal set of vertex-disjoint shortest M -augmenting paths
have been found in line 3, updating the matching in line 4 takes O ( E ) time,
as it is just a matter of going through the edges of the M -augmenting paths
Page number: 841
and adding edges to and removing edges from the matching M . Thus, each
iteration of the r epeat  loop of lines 2–5 can run in O ( E ) time.
It remains to show that the r epeat  loop iterates 
  times. W e start
with the following lemma, which shows that after each iteration of the
r epeat  loop, the length of an augmenting path increases.
Lemma 25.5
Let G  = ( V , E ) be an undirected bipartite graph with matching M , and let q
be the length of a shortest M -augmenting path. Let P  = { P1 , P2 , … , Pk } be
a maximal set of vertex-disjoint M -augmenting paths of length q . Let M ′ =
M  ⊕  ( P1  ∪  P2  ∪  ⋯  ∪  Pk ), and suppose that P  is a shortest M ′-augmenting
path. Then P  has more than q  edges.
Proof    W e consider separately the cases in which P  is vertex-disjoint from
the augmenting paths in P  and in which it is not vertex-disjoint.
First, assume that P  is vertex-disjoint from the augmenting paths in P .
Then, P  contains edges that are in M  but are not in any of P1 , P2 , … , Pk , so
that P  is also an M -augmenting path. Since P  is disjoint from P1 , P2 , … , Pk
but is also an M -augmenting path, and since P  is a maximal set of shortest
M -augmenting paths, P  must be longer than any of the augmenting paths in
P , each of which has length q . Therefore, P  has more than q  edges.
Now , assume that P  visits at least one vertex from the M -augmenting
paths in P . By Corollary 25.2, M  ′ is a matching in G  with | M ′| = | M | + k .
Since P  is an M ′-augmenting path, by Lemma 25.1, M ′ ⊕  P  is a matching
with | M ′ ⊕  P | = | M ′| + 1 = | M | + k  + 1. Now let A  = M  ⊕  M ′ ⊕  P . W e claim
that A  = ( P1  ∪  P2  ∪  ⋯  ∪  Pk ) ⊕  P :
A = M  ⊕  M ′ ⊕  P
= M  ⊕  (M ⊕  ( P 1  ∪  P 2  ∪  ⋯  ∪  P k )) ⊕  P
= ( M  ⊕  M ) ⊕  ( P 1  ∪  P 2  ∪  ⋯  ∪  P k ) ⊕  P (associativity of ⊕ )
= Ø ⊕  ( P 1  ∪  P 2  ∪  ⋯  ∪  P k ) ⊕  P ( X  ⊕  X  = Ø for all X )
= ( P 1  ∪  P 2  ∪  ⋯  ∪  P k ) ⊕  P (Ø ⊕  X  = X  for all X ).
Lemma 25.3 with M * = M ′ ⊕  P  gives that A  contains at least | M ′ ⊕  P | − | M |
= k  + 1 vertex-disjoint M -augmenting paths. Since each such M -augmenting
path has at least q  edges, we have | A | ≥ ( k  + 1) q  = kq  + q .
Page number: 842
Now we claim that P  shares at least one edge with some M -augmenting
path in P . Under the matching M ′, every vertex in each M -augmenting path
in P  is matched. (Only the first and last vertex in each M -augmenting path
Pi  is unmatched under M , and under M  ⊕  Pi , all vertices in Pi  are matched.
Because the M -augmenting paths in P  are vertex-disjoint, no other path in
P  can af fect whether the vertices in Pi  are matched. That is, the vertices in
Pi  are matched under ( M  ⊕  Pi ) ⊕  Pj  if and only if they are matched under
M  ⊕  Pi , for any other path Pj  ∈  P .) Suppose that P  shares a vertex v  with
some path Pi  ∈  P . V ertex v  cannot be an endpoint of P , because the
endpoints of P  are unmatched under M ′. Therefore, v  has an incident edge
in P  that belongs to M ′. Since any vertex has at most one incident edge in a
matching, this edge must also belong to Pi , thus proving the claim.
Because A  = ( P1  ∪  P2  ∪  ⋯  ∪  Pk ) ⊕  P  and P  shares at least one edge
with some Pi  ∈  P , we have that | A | < | P1  ∪  P2  ∪  ⋯  ∪  Pk | + | P |. Thus, we
have
kq  + q ≤ | A |
< | P 1  ∪  P 2  ∪  ⋯  ∪  P k | + | P |
= kq  + | P |,
so that q  < | P |. W e conclude that P  contains more than q  edges.
▪
The next lemma bounds the size of a maximum matching, based on the
length of a shortest augmenting path.
Lemma 25.6
Let M  be a matching in graph G  = ( V , E ), and let a shortest M -augmenting
path in G  contain q  edges. Then the size of a maximum matching in G  is at
most | M | + | V | / ( q  + 1).
Proof    Let M * be a maximum matching in G . By Lemma 25.3, G  contains
at least | M *| − | M | vertex-disjoint M -augmenting paths. Each of these paths
contains at least q  edges, and hence at least q  + 1 vertices. Because these
paths are vertex-disjoint, we have (| M *|−| M |)( q +1) ≤ | V |, so that | M *| ≤ | M | +
| V |/( q +1).
▪
Page number: 843
The final lemma bounds the number of iterations of the r epeat  loop of
lines 2–5.
Lemma 25.7
When the H OPCROFT -K ARP  procedure runs on an undirected bipartite graph
G  = ( V , E ), the r epeat  loop of lines 2–5 iterates 
  times.
Proof    By Lemma 25.5, the length q  of the shortest M -augmenting paths
found in line 3 increases from iteration to iteration. After 
  iterations,
therefore, we must have 
 . Consider the situation after the first
time line 4 executes with M -augmenting paths whose length is at least 
. Since the size of a matching increases by at least one edge per
iteration, Lemma 25.6 implies that the number of additional iterations
before achieving a maximum matching is at most
Hence, the total number of loop iterations is less than 
 .
▪
Thus, we have the following bound on the running time of the
H OPCROFT -K ARP  procedure.
Theorem 25.8
The procedure H OPCROFT -K ARP  runs in 
  time on an undirected
bipartite graph G  = ( V , E ).
Proof    By Lemma 25.7 the r epeat  loop iterates 
  times, and we have
seen how to implement each iteration in O ( E ) time.
▪
Exer cises
25.1-1
Use the Hopcroft-Karp algorithm to find a maximum matching for the
graph in Figure 25.1 .
25.1-2
Page number: 844
How are M -augmenting paths and augmenting paths in flow networks
similar? How do they dif fer?
25.1-3
What is the advantage of searching in the transpose HT from unmatched
vertices in layer q  (the first layer that contains an unmatched vertex in R ) to
layer 0 versus searching in the dag H  from layer 0 to layer q ?
25.1-4
Show how to bound the number of iterations of the the r epeat  loop of lines
2–5 of H OPCROFT -K ARP  by 
 .
★  25.1-5
A perfect matching  is a matching under which every vertex is matched. Let
G  = ( V , E ) be an undirected bipartite graph with vertex partition V  = L  ∪  R ,
where | L | = | R |. For any X  ⊆  V , define the neighborhood  of X  as
N ( X ) = { y  ∈  V  : ( x , y ) ∈  E  for some x  ∈  X },
that is, the set of vertices adjacent to some member of X . Prove Hall’ s
theorem : there exists a perfect matching in G  if and only if | A | ≤ | N ( A )| for
every subset A  ⊆  L .
25.1-6
In a d-regular  graph, every vertex has degree d . If G  = ( V , E ) is bipartite
with vertex partition V  = L  ∪  R  and also d -regular , then | L | = | R |. Use Hall’ s
theorem (see Exercise 25.1-5) to prove that every d -regular bipartite graph
contains a perfect matching. Then use that result to prove that every d -
regular bipartite graph contains d  disjoint perfect matchings.
25.2    The stable-marriage pr oblem
In Section 25.1 , the goal was to find a maximum matching in an undirected
bipartite graph. If you know that the graph G  = ( V , E ) with vertex partition
V  = L  ∪  R  is a complete bipartite graph1—containing an edge from every
vertex in L  to every vertex in R —then you can find a maximum matching
by a simple greedy algorithm.
Page number: 845
When a graph can have several matchings, you might want to decide
which matchings are most desirable. In Section 25.3 , we’ll add weights to
the edges and find a matching of maximum weight. In this section, we will
instead add some information to each vertex in a complete bipartite graph: a
ranking of the vertices in the other side. That is, each vertex in L  has an
ordered list of all the vertices in R , and vice-versa. T o keep things simple,
let’ s assume that L  and R  each contain n  vertices. The goal here is to match
each vertex in L  with a vertex in R  in a “stable” way .
This problem derives its name, the stable-marriage problem , from the
notion of heterosexual marriage, viewing L  as a set of women and R  as a set
of men.2 Each woman ranks all the men in terms of desirability , and each
man does the same with all the women. The goal is to pair up women and
men (a matching) so that if a woman and a man are not matched to each
other , then at least one of them prefers their assigned partner .
If a woman and a man are not matched to each other but each prefers the
other over their assigned partner , they form a blocking pair . A blocking pair
has incentive to opt out of the assigned pairing and get together on their
own. If that were to occur , then this pair would block the matching from
being “stable.” A stable matching , therefore, is a matching that has no
blocking pair . If there is a blocking pair , then the matching is unstable .
Let’ s look at an example with four women—W anda, Emma, Lacey , and
Karen—and four men—Oscar , Davis, Brent, and Hank—having the
following preferences:
W anda: Brent, Hank, Oscar , Davis
Emma: Davis, Hank, Oscar , Brent
Lacey: Brent, Davis, Hank, Oscar
Karen: Brent, Hank, Davis, Oscar
Oscar: W anda, Karen, Lacey , Emma
Davis: W anda, Lacey , Karen, Emma
Brent: Lacey , Karen, W anda, Emma
Hank: Lacey , W anda, Emma, Karen
A stable matching comprises the following pairs:
Lacey and Brent
W anda and Hank
Karen and Davis
Emma and Oscar
Page number: 846
Y ou can verify that this matching has no blocking pair . For example, even
though Karen prefers Brent and Hank to her partner Davis, Brent prefers his
partner Lacey to Karen, and Hank prefers his partner W anda to Karen, so
that neither Karen and Brent nor Karen and Hank form a blocking pair . In
fact, this stable matching is unique. Suppose instead that the last two pairs
were
Emma and Davis
Karen and Oscar
Then Karen and Davis would be a blocking pair , because they were not
paired together , Karen prefers Davis to Oscar , and Davis prefers Karen to
Emma. Therefore, this matching is not stable.
Stable matchings need not be unique. For example, suppose that there
are three women—Monica, Phoebe, and Rachel—and three men—
Chandler , Joey , and Ross—with these preferences:
Monica: Chandler , Joey , Ross
Phoebe: Joey , Ross, Chandler
Rachel: Ross, Chandler , Joey
Chandler: Phoebe, Rachel, Monica
Joey: Rachel, Monica, Phoebe
Ross: Monica, Phoebe, Rachel
In this case, there are three stable matchings:
Matching 1 Matching 2 Matching 3
Monica and Chandler Phoebe and Chandler Rachel and Chandler
Phoebe and Joey Rachel and Joey Monica and Joey
Rachel and Ross Monica and Ross Phoebe and Ross
In matching 1, all women get their first choice and all men get their last
choice. Matching 2 is the opposite, with all men getting their first choice
and all women getting their last choice. When all the women or all the men
get their first choice, there plainly cannot be a blocking pair . In matching 3,
everyone gets their second choice. Y ou can verify that there are no blocking
pairs.
Y ou might wonder whether it is always possible to come up with a stable
matching no matter what rankings each participant provides. The answer is
yes. (Exercise 25.2-3 asks you to show that even in the scenario of the
National Resident Matching Program, where each hospital takes on
multiple students, it is always possible to devise a stable assignment.) A
Page number: 847
simple algorithm known as the Gale-Shapley algorithm always finds a
stable matching. The algorithm has two variants, which mirror each other:
“woman-oriented” and “man-oriented.” Let’ s examine the woman-oriented
version. Each participant is either “free” or “engaged.” Everyone starts out
free. Engagements occur when a free woman proposes to a man. When a
man is first proposed to, he goes from free to engaged, and he always stays
engaged, though not necessarily to the same woman. If an engaged man
receives a proposal from a woman whom he prefers to the woman he’ s
currently engaged to, that engagement is broken, the woman to whom he
had been engaged becomes free, and the man and the woman whom he
prefers become engaged. Each woman proposes to the men in her
preference list, in order , until the last time she becomes engaged. When a
woman is engaged, she temporarily stops proposing, but if she becomes free
again, she continues down her list. Once everyone is engaged, the algorithm
terminates. The procedure G ALE -S HAPLEY  on the next page makes this
process more concrete. The procedure allows for some choice: any free
woman may be selected in line 2. W e’ll see that the procedure produces a
stable matching regardless of the order in which line 2 chooses free women.
For the man-oriented version, just reverse the roles of men and women in
the procedure.
Let’ s see how the G ALE -S HAPLEY  procedure executes on the example
with W anda, Emma, Lacey , Karen, Oscar , Davis, Brent, and Hank. After
everyone is initialized to free, here is one possible version of what can
occur in successive iterations of the while  loop of lines 2–9:
1 . W anda proposes to Brent. Brent is free, so that W anda and Brent
become engaged and no longer free.
2 . Emma proposes to Davis. Davis is free, so that Emma and Davis
become engaged and no longer free.
3 . Lacey proposes to Brent. Brent is engaged to W anda, but he prefers
Lacey . Brent breaks the engagement to W anda, who becomes free.
Lacey and Brent become engaged, with Lacey no longer free.
4 . Karen proposes to Brent. Brent is engaged to Lacey , whom he
prefers to Karen. Brent rejects Karen, who remains free.
5 . Karen proposes to Hank. Hank is free, so that Karen and Hank
become engaged and no longer free.
Page number: 848
6 . W anda proposes to Hank. Hank is engaged to Karen, but he prefers
W anda. Hank breaks the engagement with Karen, who becomes
free. W anda and Hank become engaged, with W anda no longer free.
7 . Karen proposes to Davis. Davis is engaged to Emma, but he prefers
Karen. Davis breaks the engagement to Emma, who becomes free.
Karen and Davis become engaged, with Karen no longer free.
8 . Emma proposes to Hank. Hank is engaged to W anda, whom he
prefers to Emma. Hank rejects Emma, who remains free.
9 . Emma proposes to Oscar . Oscar is free, so that Emma and Oscar
become engaged and no longer free.
G ALE -S HAPLEY  ( men , women , rankings )
  1 assign each woman and man as free
  2 while  some woman w  is free
  3 let m  be the first man on w ’ s ranked list to whom she has not proposed
  4 if  m  is free
  5 w  and m  become engaged to each other (and not free)
  6 elseif  m  ranks w  higher than the woman w ′ he is currently engaged to
  7 m  breaks the engagement to w ′, who becomes free
  8 w  and m  become engaged to each other (and not free)
  9 else  m  rejects w , with w  remaining free
10 r eturn  the stable matching consisting of the engaged pairs
At this point, everyone is engaged and nobody is free, so the while  loop
terminates. The procedure returns the stable matching we saw earlier .
The following theorem shows that not only does G ALE -S HAPLEY
terminate, but that it always returns a stable matching, thereby proving that
a stable matching always exists.
Theorem 25.9
The procedure G ALE -S HAPLEY  always terminates and returns a stable
matching.
Proof    Let’ s first show that the while  loop of lines 2–9 always terminates,
so that the procedure terminates. The proof is by contradiction. If the loop
fails to terminate, it is because some woman remains free. In order for a
woman to remain free, she must have proposed to all the men and been
rejected by each one. In order for a man to reject a woman, he must be
already engaged. Therefore, all the men are engaged. Once engaged, a man
Page number: 849
stays engaged (though not necessarily to the same woman). There are an
equal number n  of women and men, however , which means that every
woman is engaged, leading to the contradiction that no women are free. W e
must also show that the while  loop makes a bounded number of iterations.
Since each of the n  women goes through her ranking of the n  men in order ,
possibly not reaching the end of her list, the total number of iterations is at
most n2. Therefore, the while  loop always terminates, and the procedure
returns a matching.
W e need to show that there are no blocking pairs. W e first observe that
once a man m  is engaged to a woman w , all subsequent actions for m  occur
in lines 6–8. Therefore, once a man is engaged, he stays engaged, and any
time he breaks an engagement to a woman w , it’ s for a woman whom he
prefers to w . Suppose that a woman w  is matched with a man m , but she
prefers man m ′. W e’ll show that w  and m ′ is not a blocking pair , because m ′
does not prefer w  to his partner . Because w  ranks m ′ higher than m , she must
have proposed to m ′ before proposing to m , and m ′ either rejected her
proposal or accepted it and later broke the engagement. If m ′ rejected the
proposal from w , it is because he was already engaged to some woman he
prefers to w . If m ′ accepted and later broke the engagement, he was at some
point engaged to w  but later accepted a proposal from a woman he prefers
to w . In either case, he ultimately ends up with a partner whom he prefers to
w . W e conclude that even though w  might prefer m ′ to her partner m , it is
not also the case that m ′ prefers w  to his partner . Therefore, the procedure
returns a matching containing no blocking pairs.
▪
Exercise 25.2-1 asks you to provide the proof of the following corollary .
Corollary 25.10
Given preference rankings for n  women and n  men, the Gale-Shapley
algorithm can be implemented to run in O ( n2) time.
▪
Because line 2 can choose any free woman, you might wonder whether
dif ferent choices can produce dif ferent stable matchings. The answer is no:
as the following theorem shows, every execution of the G ALE -S HAPLEY
produces exactly the same result. Moreover , the stable matching returned is
optimal for the women.
Page number: 850
Theorem 25.1 1
Regardless of how women are chosen in line 2 of G ALE -S HAPLEY , the
procedure always returns the same stable matching, and in this stable
matching, each woman has the best partner possible in any stable matching.
Proof    The proof that each woman has the best partner possible in any
stable matching is by contradiction. Suppose that the G ALE -S HAPLEY
procedure returns a stable matching M , but that there is a dif ferent stable
matching M ′ in which some woman w  prefers her partner m ′ to the partner
m  she has in M . Because w  ranks m ′ higher than m , she must have proposed
to m ′ before proposing to m . Then there is a woman w ′ whom m ′ prefers to
w , and m ′ was already engaged to w ′ when w  proposed or m ′ accepted the
proposal from w  and later broke the engagement in favor of w ′. Either way ,
there is a moment when m ′ decided against w  in favor of w ′. Now suppose,
without loss of generality , that this moment was the first time that any man
rejected a partner who belongs to some stable matching.
W e claim that w ′ cannot have a partner m ″ in a stable matching whom
she prefers to m ′. If there were such a man m ″, then in order for w ′ to
propose to m ′, she would have proposed to m ″ and been rejected at some
point before proposing to m ′. If m ′ accepted the proposal from w  and later
broke it to accept w ′, then since this was the first rejection in a stable
matching, we get the contradiction that m ″ could not have rejected w ′
beforehand. If m ″ was already engaged to w ′ when w  proposed, then again,
m ″ could not have rejected w ′ beforehand, thus proving the claim.
Since w ′ does not prefer anyone to m ′ in a stable matching and w ′ is not
matched with m ′ in M ′ (because m ′ is matched with w  in M ′), w ′ prefers m ′
to her partner in M ′. Since w ′ prefers m ′ over her partner in M ′ and m ′
prefers w ′ over his partner w  in M ′, the pair w ′ and m ′ is a blocking pair in
M ′. Because M ′ has a blocking pair , it cannot be a stable matching, thereby
contradicting the assumption that there exists some stable matching in
which each woman has the best partner possible other than the matching M
returned by G ALE -S HAPLEY .
W e put no condition on the execution of the procedure, which means
that all possible orders in which line 2 selects women result in the same
stable matching being returned.
▪
Corollary 25.12
Page number: 851
There can be stable matchings that the G ALE -S HAPLEY  procedure does not
return.
Proof    Theorem 25.1 1 says that for a given set of rankings, G ALE -S HAPLEY
returns just one matching, no matter how it chooses women in line 2. The
earlier example of three women and three men with three dif ferent stable
matchings shows that there can be multiple stable matchings for a given set
of rankings. A call of G ALE -S HAPLEY  is capable of returning only one of
these stable matchings.
▪
Although the G ALE -S HAPLEY  procedure gives the best possible outcome
for the women, the following corollary shows that it also produces the worst
possible outcome for the men.
Corollary 25.13
In the stable matching returned by the procedure G ALE -S HAPLEY , each man
has the worst partner possible in any stable matching.
Proof    Let M  be the matching returned by a call to G ALE -S HAPLEY .
Suppose that there is another stable matching M ′ and a man m  who prefers
his partner w  in M  to his partner w ′ in M ′. Let the partner of w  in M ′ be m ′.
By Theorem 25.1 1, m  is the best partner that w  can have in any stable
matching, which means that w  prefers m  to m ′. Since m  prefers w  to w ′, the
pair w  and m  is a blocking pair in M ′, contradicting the assumption that M ′
is a stable matching.
▪
Exer cises
25.2-1
Describe how to implement the Gale-Shapley algorithm so that it runs in
O ( n2) time.
25.2-2
Is it possible to have an unstable matching with just two women and two
men? If so, provide and justify an example. If not, ar gue why not.
25.2-3
Page number: 852
The National Resident Matching Program dif fers from the scenario for the
stable-marriage problem set out in this section in two ways. First, a hospital
may be matched with more than one student, so that hospital h  takes rh  ≥ 1
students. Second, the number of students might not equal the number of
hospitals. Describe how to modify the Gale-Shapley algorithm to fit the
requirements of the National Resident Matching Program.
25.2-4
Prove the following property , which is known as weak Pareto optimality :
Let M  be the stable matching produced by the G ALE -S HAPLEY
procedure, with women proposing to men. Then, for a given
instance of the stable-marriage problem there is no matching—
stable or unstable—such that every woman has a partner whom she
prefers to her partner in the stable matching M .
25.2-5
The stable-roommates problem  is similar to the stable-marriage problem,
except that the graph is a complete graph, not bipartite, with an even
number of vertices. Each vertex represents a person, and each person ranks
all the other people. The definitions of blocking pairs and stable matching
extend in the natural way: a blocking pair comprises two people who both
prefer each other to their current partner , and a matching is stable if there
are no blocking pairs. For example, consider four people—W endy , Xenia,
Y olanda, and Zelda—with the following preference lists:
W endy: Xenia, Y olanda, Zelda
Xenia: W endy , Zelda, Y olanda
Y olanda: W endy , Zelda, Xenia
Zelda: Xenia, Y olanda, W endy
Y ou can verify that the following matching is stable:
W endy and Xenia
Y olanda and Zelda
Unlike the stable-marriage problem, the stable-roommates problem can
have inputs for which no stable matching exists. Find such an input and
explain why no stable matching exists.
Page number: 853
25.3    The Hungarian algorithm for the assignment pr oblem
Let us once again add some information to a complete bipartite graph G  =
( V , E ), where V  = L  ∪  R . This time, instead of having the vertices of each
side rank the vertices on the other side, we assign a weight to each edge.
Again, let’ s assume that the vertex sets L  and R  each contain n  vertices, so
that the graph contains n2 edges. For l  ∈  L  and r  ∈  R , denote the weight of
edge ( l , r ) by w ( l , r ), which represents the utility gained by matching vertex
l  with vertex r .
The goal is to find a perfect matching M * (see Exercises 25.1-5 and
25.1-6) whose edges have the maximum total weight over all perfect
matchings. That is, letting w ( M ) = ∑( l , r ) ∈ M  w ( l , r ) denote the total weight of
the edges in matching M , we want to find a perfect matching M * such that
w ( M *) = max { w ( M ) : M  is a perfect matching}.
W e call finding such a maximum-weight perfect matching the assignment
problem . A solution to the assignment problem is a perfect matching that
maximizes the total utility . Like the stable-marriage problem, the
assignment problem finds a matching that is “good,” but with a dif ferent
definition of good: maximizing total value rather than achieving stability .
Although you could enumerate all n! perfect matchings to solve the
assignment problem, an algorithm known as the Hungarian algorithm
solves it much faster . This section will prove an O ( n4) time bound, and
Problem 25-2 asks you to refine the algorithm to reduce the running time to
O ( n3). Instead of working with the complete bipartite graph G , the
Hungarian algorithm works with a subgraph of G  called the “equality
subgraph.” The equality subgraph, which is defined below , changes over
time and has the beneficial property that any perfect matching in the
equality subgraph is also an optimal solution to the assignment problem.
The equality subgraph depends on assigning an attribute h  to each
vertex. W e call h  the label  of a vertex, and we say that h  is a feasible vertex
labeling  of G  if
l . h  + r . h  ≥ w ( l , r ) for all l  ∈  L  and r  ∈  R .
A feasible vertex labeling always exists, such as the default vertex labeling
given by
Page number: 854
Given a feasible vertex labeling h , the equality subgraph  Gh  = ( V , Eh ) of G
consists of the same vertices as G  and the subset of edges
Eh  = {( l , r ) ∈  E  : l . h  + r . h  = w ( l , r )}.
The following theorem ties together a perfect matching in an equality
subgraph and an optimal solution to the assignment problem.
Theorem 25.14
Let G  = ( V , E ), where V  = L  ∪  R , be a complete bipartite graph where each
edge ( l , r ) ∈  E  has weight w ( l , r ). Let h  be a feasible vertex labeling of G
and Gh  be the equality subgraph of G . If Gh  contains a perfect matching M *,
then M * is an optimal solution to the assignment problem on G .
Proof    If Gh  contains a perfect matching M *, then because Gh  and G  have
the same sets of vertices, M * is also a perfect matching in G . Because each
edge of M * belongs to Gh  and each vertex has exactly one incident edge
from any perfect matching, we have
Letting M  be any perfect matching in G , we have
Thus, we have
Page number: 855
so that M * is a maximum-weight perfect matching in G .
▪
The goal now becomes finding a perfect matching in an equality
subgraph. Which equality subgraph? It does not matter! W e have free rein
to not only choose an equality subgraph, but to change which equality
subgraph we choose as we go along. W e just need to find some  perfect
matching in some  equality subgraph.
T o understand the equality subgraph better , consider again the proof of
Theorem 25.14 and, in the second half, let M  be any matching. The proof is
still valid, in particular , inequality (25.3): the weight of any matching is
always at most the sum of the vertex labels. If we choose any set of vertex
labels that define an equality subgraph, then a maximum-cardinality
matching in this equality subgraph has total value at most the sum of the
vertex labels. If the set of vertex labels is the “right” one, then it will have
total value equal to w ( M *), and a maximum-cardinality matching in the
equality subgraph is also a maximum-weight perfect matching. The
Hungarian algorithm repeatedly modifies the matching and the vertex labels
in order to achieve this goal.
The Hungarian algorithm starts with any feasible vertex labeling h  and
any matching M  in the equality subgraph Gh . It repeatedly finds an M -
augmenting path P  in Gh  and, using Lemma 25.1, updates the matching to
be M  ⊕  P , thereby incrementing the size of the matching. As long as there
is some equality subgraph that contains an M -augmenting path, the size of
the matching can increase, until a perfect matching is achieved.
Four questions arise:
1 . What initial feasible vertex labeling should the algorithm start with?
Answer: the default vertex labeling given by equations (25.1) and
(25.2).
2 . What initial matching in Gh  should the algorithm start with? Short
answer: any matching, even an empty matching, but a greedy
maximal matching works well.
Page number: 856
3 . If an M -augmenting path exists in Gh , how to find it? Short answer:
use a variant of breadth-first search similar to the second phase of
the procedure used in the Hopcroft-Karp algorithm to find a
maximal set of shortest M -augmenting paths.
4 . What if the search for an M -augmenting path fails? Short answer:
update the feasible vertex labeling to bring in at least one new edge.
W e’ll elaborate on the short answers using the example that starts in
Figure 25.4 . Here, L  = { l1 , l2 , … , l7 } and R  = { r1 , r2 , … , r7 }. The edge
weights appear in the matrix shown in part (a), where the weight w ( li , rj )
appears in row i  and column j . The feasible vertex labels, given by the
default vertex labeling, appear to the left of and above the matrix. Matrix
entries in red indicate edges ( li , rj ) for which li . h  + rj . h  = w ( li , rj ), that is,
edges in the equality subgraph Gh  appearing in part (b) of the figure.
Gr eedy maximal bipartite matching
There are several ways to implement a greedy method to find a maximal
bipartite matching. The procedure G REEDY -B IP AR TITE -M A TCHING  shows one.
Edges in Figure 25.4(b)  highlighted in blue indicate the initial greedy
maximal matching in Gh . Exercise 25.3-2 asks you to show that the
G REEDY -B IP AR TITE -M A TCHING  procedure returns a matching that is at least
half the size of a maximum matching.
G REEDY -B IP AR TITE -M A TCHING  ( G )
1 M  = Ø
2 for  each vertex l  ∈  L
3 if  l  has an unmatched neighbor in R
4 choose any such unmatched neighbor r  ∈  R
5 M  = M  ∪  {( l , r )}
6 r eturn  M
Page number: 857
Figur e 25.4  The start of the Hungarian algorithm. (a)  The matrix of edge weights for a bipartite
graph with L  = { l 1 , l 2 , … , l 7 }. The value in row i  and column j  indicates w ( l i , r j ). Feasible vertex
labels appear above and next to the matrix. Red entries correspond to edges in the equality subgraph.
(b)  The equality subgraph G h . Edges highlighted in blue belong to the initial greedy maximal
matching M . Blue vertices are matched, and tan vertices are unmatched. (c)  The directed equality
subgraph G M,h  created from G h  by directing edges in M  from R  to L  and all other edges from L  to R .
Finding an M -augmenting path in Gh
T o find an M -augmenting path in the equality subgraph Gh  with a matching
M , the Hungarian algorithm first creates the directed equality
subgraph  GM,h  from Gh , just as the Hopcroft-Karp algorithm creates GM
from G . As in the Hopcroft-Karp algorithm, you can think of an M -
augmenting path as starting from an unmatched vertex in L , ending at an
unmatched vertex in R , taking unmatched edges from L  to R , and taking
matched edges from R  to L . Thus, GM,h  = ( V , EM,h ), where
E M,h = {( l , r ) : l  ∈  L , r  ∈  R , and ( l , r ) ∈  E h  − M  } (edges from L  to R )
∪  {( r , l ) : r  ∈  R , l  ∈  L , and ( l , r ) ∈  M  } (edges from R  to L ).
Page number: 858
Because an M -augmenting path in the directed equality subgraph GM.h  is
also an M -augmenting path in the equality subgraph Gh , it suf fices to find
M -augmenting paths in GM.h . Figure 25.4(c)  shows the directed equality
subgraph GM,h  corresponding to the equality subgraph Gh  and matching M
from part (b) of the figure.
W ith the directed equality subgraph GM,h  in hand, the Hungarian
algorithm searches for an M -augmenting path from any unmatched vertex
in L  to any unmatched vertex in R . Any exhaustive graph-search method
suf fices. Here, we’ll use breadth-first search, starting from all the
unmatched vertices in L  (just as the Hopcroft-Karp algorithm does when
creating the dag H ), but stopping upon first discovering some unmatched
vertex in R . Figure 25.5  shows the idea. T o start from all the unmatched
vertices in L , initialize the first-in, first-out queue with all the unmatched
vertices in L , rather than just one source vertex. Unlike the dag H  in the
Hopcroft-Karp algorithm, here each vertex needs just one predecessor , so
that the breadth-first search creates a breadth-first forest  F  = ( VF , EF ). Each
unmatched vertex in L  is a root in F .
In Figure 25.5(g) , the breadth-first search has found the M -augmenting
path 〈 ( l4 , r2 ), ( r2 , l1 ), ( l1 , r3 ), ( r3 , l6 ), ( l6 , r5 )〉 . Figure 25.6(a)  shows the new
matching created by taking the symmetric dif ference of the matching M  in
Figure 25.5(a)  with this M -augmenting path.
When the sear ch for an M -augmenting path fails
Having updated the matching M  from an M -augmenting path, the
Hungarian algorithm updates the directed equality subgraph GM,h  according
to the new matching and then starts a new breadth-first search from all the
unmatched vertices in L . Figure 25.6  shows the start of this process, picking
up from Figure 25.5 .
In Figure 25.6(d) , the queue contains vertices l4  and l3 . Neither of these
vertices has an edge that leaves it, however , so that once these vertices are
removed from the queue, the queue becomes empty . The search terminates
at this point, before discovering an unmatched vertex in R  to yield an M -
augmenting path. Whenever this situation occurs, the most recently
discovered vertices must belong to L . Why? Whenever an unmatched vertex
in R  is discovered, the search has found an M -augmenting path, and when a
Page number: 859
matched vertex in R  is discovered, it has an unvisited neighbor in L , which
the search can then discover .
Recall that we have the freedom to work with any equality subgraph. W e
can change the directed equality subgraph “on the fly ,” as long we do not
counteract the work already done. The Hungarian algorithm updates the
feasible vertex labeling h  to fulfill the following criteria:
1 . No edge in the breadth-first forest F  leaves the directed equality
subgraph.
2 . No edge in the matching M  leaves the directed equality subgraph.
3 . At least one edge ( l , r ), where l  ∈  L  ∩ VF  and r  ∈  R  − VF  goes into
Eh , and hence into EM,h . Therefore, at least one vertex in R  will be
newly discovered.
Thus, at least one new edge enters the directed equality subgraph, and any
edge that leaves the directed equality subgraph belongs to neither the
matching M  nor the breadth-first forest F . Newly discovered vertices in R
are enqueued, but their distances are not necessarily 1 greater than the
distances of the most recently discovered vertices in L .

Page number: 860
Figur e 25.5  Finding an M -augmenting path in G M,h  by breadth-first search. (a)  The directed
equality subgraph G M,h  from Figure 25.4(c) . (b)–(g)  Successive versions of the breadth-first forest
F , shown as the vertices at each distance from the roots—the unmatched vertices in L —are
discovered. In parts (b)–(f), the layer of vertices closest to the bottom of the figure are those in the
first-in, first-out queue. For example, in part (b), the queue contains the roots 〈 l 4 , l 5 , l 7〉 , and in part
(e), the queue contains 〈 r 3 , r 4〉 , at distance 3 from the roots. In part (g), the unmatched vertex r 5  is
discovered, so the breadth-first search terminates. The path 〈 ( l 4 , r 2 ), ( r 2 , l 1 ), ( l 1 , r 3 ), ( r 3 , l 6 ), ( l 6 ,
r 5 )〉 , highlighted in orange in parts (a) and (g), is an M -augmenting path. T aking its symmetric
dif ference with the matching M  yields a new matching with one more edge than M .
Page number: 861
Figur e 25.6 (a)  The new matching M  and the new directed equality subgraph G M.h  after updating
the matching in Figure 25.5(a)  with the M -augmenting path in Figure 25.5(g) . (b)–(d)  Successive
versions of the breadth-first forest F  in a new breadth-first search with roots l 5  and l 7 . After the
vertices l 4  and l 3  in part (d) have been removed from the queue, the queue becomes empty before the
search can discover an unmatched vertex in R .
T o update the feasible vertex labeling, the Hungarian algorithm first
computes the value
where FL  = L  ∩ VF  and FR  = R  ∩ VF  denote the vertices in the breadth-first
forest F  that belong to L  and R , respectively . That is, δ  is the smallest
dif ference by which an edge incident on a vertex in FL  missed being in the
current equality subgraph Gh . The Hungarian algorithm then creates a new
feasible vertex labeling, say h ′, by subtracting δ  from l . h  for all vertices l  ∈
FL  and adding δ  to r . h  for all vertices r  ∈  FR :

Page number: 862
The following lemma shows that these changes achieve the three criteria
above.
Lemma 25.15
Let h  be a feasible vertex labeling for the complete bipartite graph G  with
equality subgraph Gh , and let M  be a matching for Gh  and F  be a breadth-
first forest being constructed for the directed equality subgraph GM,h . Then,
the labeling h ′ in equation (25.5) is a feasible vertex labeling for G  with the
following properties:
1 . If ( u , v ) is an edge in the breadth-first forest F  for GM,h , then ( u , v )
∈  EM,h′ .
2 . If ( l , r ) belongs to the matching M  for Gh , then ( r , l ) ∈  EM,h′ .
3 . There exist vertices l  ∈  FL  and r  ∈  R  − FR  such that ( l , r ) ∉  EM,h
but ( l , r ) ∈  EM,h′ .
Proof    W e first show that h ′ is a feasible vertex labeling for G . Because h  is
a feasible vertex labeling, we have l . h  + r . h  ≥ w ( l , r ) for all l  ∈  L  and r  ∈
R . In order for h ′ to not be a feasible vertex labeling, we would need l . h ′ +
r . h ′ < l . h  + r . h  for some l  ∈  L  and r  ∈  R . The only way this could occur
would be for some l  ∈  FL  and r  ∈  R  − FR . In this instance, the amount of
the decrease equals δ , so that l . h ′ + r . h ′ = l . h  − δ  + r . h . By equation (25.4),
we have that l . h − δ + r . h  ≥ w ( l , r ) for any l  ∈  FL  and r  ∈  R − FR , so that l . h ′
+ r . h ′ ≥ w ( l , r ). For all other edges, we have l . h ′ + r . h ′ ≥ l . h + r . h  ≥ w ( l , r ).
Thus, h ′ is a feasible vertex labeling.
Now we show that each of the three desired properties holds:
1 . If l  ∈  FL  and r  ∈  FR , then we have l . h ′+ r . h ′ = l . h + r . h  because δ  is
added to the label of l  and subtracted from the label of r . Therefore,
if an edge belongs to F  for the directed graph GM,h , it also belongs
to GM,h ′.
2 . W e claim that at the time the Hungarian algorithm computes the
new feasible vertex labeling h ′, for every edge ( l , r ) ∈  M , we have l
∈  FL  if and only if r  ∈  FR . T o see why , consider a matched vertex r
and let ( l , r ) ∈  M . First suppose that r  ∈  FR , so that the search
Page number: 863
discovered r  and enqueued it. When r  was removed from the queue,
l  was discovered, so l  ∈  FL . Now suppose that r  ∉  FR , so r  is
undiscovered. W e will show that l  ∉  FL . The only edge in GM,h  that
enters l  is ( r , l ), and since r  is undiscovered, the search has not taken
this edge; if l  ∈  FL , it is not because of the edge ( r , l ). The only
other way that a vertex in L  can be in FL  is if it is a root of the
search, but only unmatched vertices in L  are roots and l  is matched.
Thus, l  ∉  FL , and the claim is proved.
W e already saw that l  ∈  FL  and r  ∈  FR  implies l . h ′ + r . h ′ = l . h  + r . h .
For the opposite case, when l  ∈  L  − FL  and R  ∈  R  − FR , we have
that l . h ′ = l . h  and r . h ′ = r . h , so that again l . h ′ + r . h ′ = l . h  + r . h . Thus,
if edge ( l , r ) is in the matching M  for the equality graph Gh , then ( r ,
l ) ∈  EM,h ′ .
3 . Let ( l , r ) be an edge not in Eh  such that l  ∈  FL , r  ∈  R  − FR , and δ  =
l . h  + r . h  − w ( l , r ). By the definition of δ , there is at least one such
edge. Then, we have
l . h ′ + r . h ′ = l . h  − δ  + r . h
= l . h  − ( l . h  + r . h  − w ( l , r )) + r . h
= w ( l , r ),
and thus ( l , r ) ∈  Eh ′ . Since ( l , r ) is not in Eh , it is not in the matching
M , so that in EM,h ′  it must be directed from L  to R . Thus, ( l , r ) ∈
EM,h ′ .
▪
It is possible for an edge to belong to EM,h  but not to EM,h ′ . By Lemma
25.15, any such edge belongs neither to the matching M  nor to the breadth-
first forest F  at the time that the new feasible vertex labeling h ′ is computed.
(See Exercise 25.3-3.)
Going back to Figure 25.6(d) , the queue became empty before an M -
augmenting path was found. Figure 25.7  shows the next steps taken by the
algorithm. The value of δ  = 1 is achieved by the edge ( l5 , r3 ) because in
Figure 25.4(a) , l5 . h  + r3 . h  − w ( l5 , r3 ) = 6 + 0 − 5 = 1. In Figure 25.7(a) , the
values of l3 . h , l4 . h , l5 . h , and l7 . h  have decreased by 1 and the values of r2 . h
Page number: 864
and r7 . h  have increased by 1 because these vertices are in F . As a result, the
edges ( l1 , r2 ) and ( l6 , r7 ) leave GM,h  and the edge ( l5 , r3 ) enters. Figure
25.7(b)  shows the new directed equality subgraph GM,h . W ith edge ( l5 , r3 )
now in GM,h , Figure 25.7(c)  shows that this edge is added to the breadth-
first forest F , and r3  is added to the queue. Parts (c)–(f) show the breadth-
first forest continuing to be built until in part (f), the queue once again
becomes empty after vertex l2 , which has no edges leaving, is removed.
Again, the algorithm must update the feasible vertex labeling and the
directed equality subgraph. Now the value of δ  = 1 is achieved by three
edges: ( l1 , r6 ), ( l5 , r6 ), and ( l7 , r6 ).
As Figure 25.8  shows in parts (a) and (b), these edges enter GM,h , and
edge ( l6 , r3 ) leaves. Part (c) shows that edge ( l1 , r6 ) is added to the breadth-
first forest. (Either of edges ( l5 , r6 ) or ( l7 , r6 ) could have been added
instead.) Because r6  is unmatched, the search has found the M -augmenting
path 〈 ( l5 , r3 ), ( r3 , l1 ), ( l1 , r6 )〉 , highlighted in orange.
Figure 25.9(a)  shows GM,h  after the matching M  has been updated by
taking its symmetric dif ference with the M -augmenting path. The
Hungarian algorithm starts its last breadth-first search, with vertex l7  as the
only root. The search proceeds as shown in parts (b)–(h) of the figure, until
the queue becomes empty after removing l4 . This time, we find that δ  = 2,
achieved by the five edges ( l2 , r5 ), ( l3 , r1 ), ( l4 , r5 ), ( l5 , r1 ), and ( l5 , r5 ), each
of which enters GM,h . Figure 25.10(a)  shows the results of decreasing the
feasible vertex label of each vertex in FL  by 2 and increasing the feasible
vertex label of each vertex in FR  by 2, and Figure 25.10(b)  shows the
resulting directed equality subgraph GM,h . Part (c) shows that edge ( l3 , r1 ) is
added to the breadth-first forest. Since r1  is an unmatched vertex, the search
terminates, having found the M -augmenting path 〈 ( l7 , r7 ), ( r7 , l3 ), ( l3 , r1 )〉 ,
highlighted in orange. If r1  had been matched, vertex r5  would also have
been added to the breadth-first forest, with any of l2 , l4 , or l5  as its parent.
Page number: 865
Figur e 25.7  Updating the feasible vertex labeling and the directed equality subgraph G M,h  when the
queue becomes empty before finding an M -augmenting path. (a)  W ith δ  = 1, the values of l 3 . h , l 4 . h ,
l 5 . h , and l 7 . h  decreased by 1 and r 2 . h  and r 7 . h  increased by 1. Edges ( l 1 , r 2 ) and ( l 6 , r 7 ) leave G M,h ,
and edge ( l 5 , r 3 ) enters. These changes are highlighted in yellow . (b)  The resulting directed equality
subgraph G M,h . (c)–(f)  W ith edge ( l 5 , r 3 ) added to the breadth-first forest and r 3  added to the queue,
the breadth-first search continues until the queue once again becomes empty in part (f).
After updating the matching M , the algorithm arrives at the perfect
matching shown for the equality subgraph Gh  in Figure 25.1 1 . By Theorem
25.14, the edges in M  form an optimal solution to the original assignment
problem given in the matrix. Here, the weights of edges ( l1 , r6 ), ( l2 , r4 ), ( l3 ,
r1 ), ( l4 , r2 ), ( l5 , r3 ), ( l6 , r5 ), and ( l7 , r7 ) sum to 65, which is the maximum
weight of any matching.
The weight of the maximum-weight matching equals the sum of all the
feasible vertex labels. These problems—maximizing the weight of a
matching and minimizing the sum of the feasible vertex labels—are “duals”
of each other , in a similar vein to how the value of a maximum flow equals
the capacity of a minimum cut. Section 29.3  explores duality in more depth.
Page number: 866
Figur e 25.8  Another update to the feasible vertex labeling and directed equality subgraph G M,h
because the queue became empty before finding an M -augmenting path. (a)  W ith δ  = 1, the values of
l 1 . h , l 2 . h , l 3 . h , l 4 . h , l 5 . h , and l 7 . h  decrease by 1, and r 2 . h , r 3 . h , r 4 . h , and r 7 . h  increase by 1. Edge ( l 6 ,
r 3 ) leaves G M,h , and edges ( l 1 , r 6 ), ( l 5 , r 6 ) and ( l 7 , r 6 ) enter . (b)  The resulting directed equality
subgraph G M,h . (c)  W ith edge ( l 1 , r 6 ) added to the breadth-first forest and r 6  unmatched, the search
terminates, having found the M -augmenting path 〈 ( l 5 , r 3 ), ( r 3 , l 1 ), ( l 1 , r 6 )〉 , highlighted in orange in
parts (b) and (c).
The Hungarian algorithm
The procedure H UNGARIAN  on page 737 and its subroutine F IND -
A UGMENTING -P A TH  on page 738 follow the steps we have just seen. The
third property in Lemma 25.15 ensures that in line 23 of F IND -
A UGMENTING -P A TH  the queue Q  is nonempty . The pseudocode uses the
attribute π  to indicate predecessor vertices in the breadth-first forest. Instead
of coloring vertices, as in the BFS procedure on page 556, the search puts
the discovered vertices into the sets FL  and FR . Because the Hungarian
algorithm does not need breadth-first distances, the pseudocode omits the d
attribute computed by the BFS procedure.
Page number: 867
Figur e 25.9 (a)  The new matching M  and the new directed equality subgraph G M,h  after updating
the matching in Figure 25.8  with the M -augmenting path in Figure 25.8  parts (b) and (c). (b)–(h)
Successive versions of the breadth-first forest F  in a new breadth-first search with root l 7 . After the
vertex l 4  in part (h) has been removed from the queue, the queue becomes empty before the search
discovers an unmatched vertex in R .
Now , let’ s see why the Hungarian algorithm runs in O ( n4) time, where
| V | = n /2 and | E | = n2 in the original graph G . (Below we outline how to
reduce the running time to O ( n3).) Y ou can go through the pseudocode of
H UNGARIAN  to verify that lines 1–6 and 1 1 take O ( n2) time. The while  loop
of lines 7–10 iterates at most n  times, since each iteration increases the size
of the matching M  by 1. Each test in line 7 can take constant time by just
Page number: 868
checking whether | M | < n , each update of M  in line 9 takes O ( n ) time, and
the updates in line 10 take O ( n2) time.
T o achieve the O ( n4) time bound, it remains to show that each call of
F IND -A UGMENTING -P A TH  runs in O ( n3) time. Let’ s call each execution of
lines 10–22 a growth step . Ignoring the growth steps, you can verify that
F IND -A UGMENTING-P A TH  is a breadth-first search. W ith the sets FL  and FR
represented appropriately , the breadth-first search takes O ( V  + E ) = O ( n2)
time. W ithin a call of F IND -A UGMENTING -P A TH , at most n  growth steps can
occur , since each growth step is guaranteed to discover at least one vertex in
R . Since there are at most n2 edges in GM,h , the for  loop of lines 16–22
iterates at most n2 times per call of F IND -A UGMENTING -P A TH . The bottleneck
is lines 10 and 15, which take O ( n2) time, so that F IND -A UGMENTING -P A TH
takes O ( n3) time.
Figur e 25.10  Updating the feasible vertex labeling and directed equality subgraph G M,h . (a)  Here, δ
= 2, so the values of l 1 . h , l 2 . h , l 3 . h , l 4 . h , l 5 . h , and l 7 . h  decreased by 2, and the values of r 2 . h , r 3 . h ,
r 4 . h , r 6 . h , and r 7 . h  increased by 2. Edges ( l 2 , r 5 ), ( l 3 , r 1 ), ( l 4 , r 5 ), ( l 5 , r 1 ), and ( l 5 , r 5 ) enter G M,h .
(b)  The resulting directed graph G M,h . (c)  W ith edge ( l 3 , r 1 ) added to the breadth-first forest and r 1
unmatched, the search terminates, having found the M -augmenting path 〈 ( l 7 , r 7 ), ( r 7 , l 3 ), ( l 3 , r 1 )〉 ,
highlighted in orange in parts (b) and (c).
Page number: 869
Exercise 25.3-5 asks you to show that reconstructing the directed
equality subgraph GM,h  in line 15 is actually unnecessary , so that its cost
can be eliminated. Reducing the cost of computing δ  in line 10 to O ( n )
takes a little more ef fort and is the subject of Problem 25-2. W ith these
changes, each call of F IND -A UGMENTING -P A TH  takes O ( n2) time, so that the
Hungarian algorithm runs in O ( n3) time.
Figur e 25.1 1  The final matching, shown for the equality subgraph G h  with blue edges and blue
entries in the matrix. The weights of the edges in the matching sum to 65, which is the maximum for
any matching in the original complete bipartite graph G , as well as the sum of all the final feasible
vertex labels.
H UNGARIAN  ( G )
  1 for  each vertex l  ∈  L
  2 l . h  = max { w ( l , r ) : r  ∈  R } //  from equation (25.1)
  3 for  each vertex r  ∈  R
  4 r . h  = 0 //  from equation (25.2)
  5 let M  be any matching in G h  (such as the matching returned by
G REEDY -B IP AR TITE -M A TCHING )
  6 from G , M , and h , form the equality subgraph G h
and the directed equality subgraph G M,h
  7 while  M  is not a perfect matching in G h
Page number: 870
  8 P  = F IND -A UGMENTING -P A TH  ( G M,h )
  9 M  = M  ⊕  P
10 update the equality subgraph G h
and the directed equality subgraph G M,h
1 1 r eturn  M
F IND -A UGMENTING -P A TH  ( GM,h )
  1 Q  = Ø
  2 F L  = Ø
  3 F R  = Ø
  4 for  each unmatched vertex l  ∈  L
  5 l . π  = NIL
  6 E NQUEUE  ( Q , l )
  7 F L  = F L  ∪  { l } //  forest F  starts with unmatched vertices in L
  8 r epeat
  9 if  Q  is empty //  ran out of vertices to search from?
10 δ  = min { l . h  + r . h  − w ( l , r ) : l  ∈  F L  and r  ∈  R  − F R }
1 1 for  each vertex l  ∈  F L
12 l . h  = l . h  − δ //  relabel according to equation (25.5)
13 for  each vertex r  ∈  F R
14 r . h  = r . h  + δ //  relabel according to equation (25.5)
15 from G , M , and h , form a new directed equality graph G M,h
16 for  each new edge ( l , r ) in
G M,h//  continue search with new
edges
17 if  r  ∉  F R
18 r . π  = l //  discover r , add it to F
19 if  r  is unmatched
20 an M -augmenting path has been found
20 (exit the r epeat  loop)
21 else  E NQUEUE  ( Q ,
r )//  can search from r  later
22 F R  = F R  ∪  { r }
23 u  = D EQUEUE  ( Q ) //  search from u
24 for  each neighbor v  of u  in G M,h
25 if  v  ∈  L
26 v .π  = u
27 F L  = F L  ∪  { v } //  discover v , add it to F
28 E NQUEUE  ( Q , v ) //  can search from v  later
29 elseif  v  ∉  F R //  v  ∈  R , do same as lines 18–22
30 v .π  = u
31 if  v  is unmatched
32 an M -augmenting path has been found
(exit the r epeat  loop)
33 else  E NQUEUE  ( Q , v )
Page number: 871
34 F R  = F R  ∪  { v }
35 until  an M -augmenting path has been found
36 using the predecessor attributes π , construct an M -augmenting path P  by tracing back from the
unmatched vertex in R
37 r eturn  P
Exer cises
25.3-1
The F IND -A UGMENTING -P A TH  procedure checks in two places (lines 19 and
31) whether a vertex it discovers in R  is unmatched. Show how to rewrite
the pseudocode so that it checks for an unmatched vertex in R  in only one
place. What is the downside of doing so?
25.3-2
Show that for any bipartite graph, the G REEDY -B IP AR TITE -M A TCHING
procedure on page 726 returns a matching at least half the size of a
maximum matching.
25.3-3
Show that if an edge ( l , r ) belongs to the directed equality subgraph GM,h
but is not a member of GM,h ′ , where h ′ is given by equation (25.5), then l  ∈
L  − FL  and r  ∈  FR  at the time that h ′ is computed.
25.3-4
At line 29 in the F IND -A UGMENTING -P A TH  procedure, it has already been
established that v  ∈  R . This line checks to see whether v  is already
discovered by testing whether v  ∈  FR . Why doesn’ t the procedure need to
check whether v  is already discovered for the case when v  ∈  L , in lines 26–
28?
25.3-5
Professor Hrabosky asserts that the directed equality subgraph GM,h  must be
constructed and maintained by the Hungarian algorithm, so that line 6 of
H UNGARIAN  and line 15 of F IND -A UGMENTING -P A TH  are required. Ar gue that
the professor is incorrect by showing how to determine whether an edge
belongs to EM,h  without explicitly constructing GM,h .
Page number: 872
25.3-6
How can you modify the Hungarian algorithm to find a matching of
vertices in L  to vertices in R  that minimizes, rather than maximizes, the sum
of the edge weights in the matching?
25.3-7
How can an assignment problem with | L | ≠ | R | be modified so that the
Hungarian algorithm solves it?
Pr oblems
25-1     Perfect matchings in a regular bipartite graph
a.  Problem 20-3 asked about Euler tours in directed graphs. Prove that a
connected, undir ected  graph G  = ( V , E ) has an Euler tour—a cycle
traversing each edge exactly once, though it may visit a vertex multiple
times—if and only if the degree of every vertex in V  is even.
b.  Assuming that G  is connected, undirected, and every vertex in V  has even
degree, give an O ( E )-time algorithm to find an Euler tour of G , as in
Problem 20-3(b).
c.  Exercise 25.1-6 states that if G  = ( V , E ) is a d -regular bipartite graph,
then it contains d  disjoint perfect matchings. Suppose that d  is an exact
power of 2. Give an algorithm to find all d  disjoint perfect matchings in a
d -regular bipartite graph in Θ( E  lg d ) time.
25-2     Reducing the running time of the Hungarian algorithm to O ( n3)
In this problem, you will show how to reduce the running time of the
Hungarian algorithm from O ( n4) to O ( n3) by showing how to reduce the
running time of the F IND -A UGMENTING -P A TH  procedure from O ( n3) to O ( n2).
Exercise 25.3-5 demonstrates that line 6 of H UNGARIAN  and line 15 of F IND -
A UGMENTING -P A TH  are unnecessary . Now you will show how to reduce the
running time of each execution of line 10 in F IND -A UGMENTING -P A TH  to
O ( n ).
For each vertex r  ∈  R  − FR , define a new attribute r .σ  where
r .σ  = min { l . h  + r . h  − w ( l , r ) : l  ∈  FL }.
Page number: 873
That is, r .σ  indicates how close r  is to being adjacent to some vertex l  ∈  FL
in the directed equality subgraph Gm,h . Initially , before placing any vertices
into FL , set r .σ  to ∞ for all r  ∈  R .
a.  Show how to compute δ  in line 10 in O ( n ) time, based on the σ  attribute.
b.  Show how to update all the σ  attributes in O ( n ) time after δ  has been
computed.
c.  Show that updating all the σ  attributes when FL  changes takes O ( n2) time
per call of F IND -A UGMENTING -P A TH .
d.  Conclude that the H UNGARIAN  procedure can be implemented to run in
O ( n3) time.
25-3     Other matching problems
The Hungarian algorithm finds a maximum-weight perfect matching in a
complete bipartite graph. It is possible to use the Hungarian algorithm to
solve problems in other graphs by modifying the input graph, running the
Hungarian algorithm, and then possibly modifying the output. Show how to
solve the following matching problems in this manner .
a.  Give an algorithm to find a maximum-weight matching in a weighted
bipartite graph that is not necessarily complete and with all edge weights
positive.
b.  Redo part (a), but with edge weights allowed to also be 0 or negative.
c.  A cycle cover  in a directed graph, not necessarily bipartite, is a set of
edge-disjoint directed cycles such that each vertex lies on at most one
cycle. Given nonnegative edge weights w ( u , v ), let C  be the set of edges
in a cycle cover , and define w ( C ) = ∑( u,v ) ∈ C  w ( u, v ) to be the weight of
the cycle cover . Give an algorithm to find a maximum-weight cycle
cover .
25-4     Fractional matchings
It is possible to define a fractional matching . Given a graph G  = ( V , E ), we
define a fractional matching x  as a function x  : E  → [0, 1] (real numbers
between 0 and 1, inclusive) such that for every vertex u  ∈  V , we have
Page number: 874
∑( u,v ) ∈ E  x ( u, v ) ≤ 1. The value of a fractional matching is ∑( u, v ) ∈ E  x ( u, v ).
The definition of a fractional matching is identical to that of a matching,
except that a matching has the additional constraint that x ( u , v ) ∈  {0, 1} for
all edges ( u , v ) ∈  E . Given a graph, we let M * denote a maximum matching
and x * denote a fractional matching with maximum value.
a.  Ar gue that, for any bipartite graph, we must have ∑( u, v ) ∈ E  x *( u, v ) ≥
| M*|.
b.  Prove that, for any bipartite graph, we must have ∑( u, v ) ∈ E  x *( e ) ≤ | M*|.
( Hint:  Give an algorithm that converts a fractional matching with an
integer value to a matching.) Conclude that the maximum value of a
fractional matching in a bipartite graph is the same as the size of the
maximum cardinality matching.
c.  W e can define a fractional matching in a weighted graph in the same
manner: the value of the matching is now ∑( u, v ) ∈ E  w ( u, v ) x ( u, v ). Extend
the results of the previous parts to show that in a weighted bipartite graph,
the maximum value of a weighted fractional matching is equal to the
value of a maximum weighted matching.
d.  In a general graph, the analogous results do not necessarily hold. Give an
example of a small graph that is not bipartite for which the fractional
matching with maximum value is not a maximum matching.
25-5     Computing vertex labels
Y ou are given a complete bipartite graph G  = ( V , E ) with edge weights w ( l ,
r ) for all ( l , r ) ∈  E . Y ou are also given a maximum-weight perfect matching
M * for G . Y ou wish to compute a feasible vertex labeling h  such that M * is
a perfect matching in the equality subgraph Gh . That is, you want to
compute a labeling h  of vertices such that
(Requirement (25.6) holds for all edges, and the stronger requirement (25.7)
holds for all edges in M *.) Give an algorithm to compute the feasible vertex
labeling h , and prove that it is correct. ( Hint:  Use the similarity between
conditions (25.6) and (25.7) and some of the properties of shortest paths
Page number: 875
proved in Chapter 22 , in particular the triangle inequality (Lemma 22.10)
and the conver gence property (Lemma 22.14.))
Chapter notes
Matching algorithms have a long history and have been central to many
breakthroughs in algorithm design and analysis. The book by Lovász and
Plummer [ 306 ] is an excellent reference on matching problems, and the
chapter on matching in the book by Ahuja, Magnanti and Orlin [ 10 ] also
has extensive references.
The Hopcroft-Karp algorithm is by Hopcroft and Karp [ 224 ]. Madry
[ 308 ] gave an Õ ( E10/7)-time algorithm, which is asymptotically faster than
Hopcroft-Karp for sparse graphs.
Corollary 25.4 is due to Ber ge [ 53 ], and it also holds in graphs that are
not bipartite. Matching in general graphs requires more complicated
algorithms. The first polynomial-time algorithm, running in O ( V  4) time, is
due to Edmonds [ 130 ] (in a paper that also introduced the notion of a
polynomial-time algorithm). Like the bipartite case, this algorithm also uses
augmenting paths, although the algorithm for finding augmenting paths in
general graphs is more involved than the one for bipartite graphs.
Subsequently , several 
 -time algorithms appeared, including ones by
Gabow and T arjan [ 168 ] as part of an algorithm for weighted matching and
a simpler one by Gabow [ 164 ].
The Hungarian algorithm is described in the book by Bondy and Murty
[ 67 ] and is based on work by Kuhn [ 273 ] and Munkres [ 337 ]. Kuhn
adopted the name “Hungarian algorithm” because the algorithm derived
from work by the Hungarian mathematicians D. K ő nig and J. Egervéry . The
algorithm is an early example of a primal-dual algorithm. A faster
algorithm that runs in 
  time, where the edge weights are
integers from 0 to W , was given by Gabow and T arjan [ 167 ], and an
algorithm with the same time bound for maximum-weight matching in
general graphs was given by Duan, Pettie, and Su [ 127 ].
The stable-marriage problem was first defined and analyzed by Gale and
Shapley [ 169 ]. The stable-marriage problem has numerous variants. The
books by Gusfield and Irving [ 203 ], Knuth [ 266 ], and Manlove [ 313 ] serve
as excellent sources for cataloging and solving them.
Page number: 876
1 The definition of a complete bipartite graph dif fers from the definition of complete graph given on
page 1 167 because in a bipartite graph, there are no edges between vertices in L  and no edges
between vertices in R .
2 Although marriage norms are changing, it’ s traditional to view the stable-marriage problem through
the lens of heterosexual marriage.
Page number: 877
Part VII    Selected T opics
Page number: 878
 
 
Intr oduction
This part contains a selection of algorithmic topics that extend and
complement earlier material in this book. Some chapters introduce new
models of computation such as circuits or parallel computers. Others cover
specialized domains such as matrices or number theory . The last two
chapters discuss some of the known limitations to the design of ef ficient
algorithms and introduce techniques for coping with those limitations.
Chapter 26  presents an algorithmic model for parallel computing based
on task-parallel computing, and more specifically , fork-join parallelism.
The chapter introduces the basics of the model, showing how to quantify
parallelism in terms of the measures of work and span. It then investigates
several interesting fork-join algorithms, including algorithms for matrix
multiplication and mer ge sorting.
An algorithm that receives its input over time, rather than having the
entire input available at the start, is called an “online” algorithm. Chapter
27  examines techniques used in online algorithms, starting with the “toy”
problem of how long to wait for an elevator before taking the stairs. It then
studies the “move-to-front” heuristic for maintaining a linked list and
finishes with the online version of the caching problem we saw back in
Section 15.4 . The analyses of these online algorithms are remarkable in that
they prove that these algorithms, which do not know their future inputs,
perform within a constant factor of optimal algorithms that know the future
inputs.
Chapter 28  studies ef ficient algorithms for operating on matrices. It
presents two general methods—LU decomposition and LUP decomposition
—for solving linear equations by Gaussian elimination in O ( n3) time. It also
Page number: 879
shows that matrix inversion and matrix multiplication can be performed
equally fast. The chapter concludes by showing how to compute a least-
squares approximate solution when a set of linear equations has no exact
solution.
Chapter 29  studies how to model problems as linear programs, where
the goal is to maximize or minimize an objective, given limited resources
and competing constraints. Linear programming arises in a variety of
practical application areas. The chapter also addresses the concept of
“duality” which, by establishing that a maximization problem and
minimization problem have the same objective value, helps to show that
solutions to each are optimal.
Chapter 30  studies operations on polynomials and shows how to use a
well-known signal-processing technique—the fast Fourier transform (FFT)
—to multiply two degree- n  polynomials in O ( n  lg n ) time. It also derives a
parallel circuit to compute the FFT .
Chapter 31  presents number -theoretic algorithms. After reviewing
elementary number theory , it presents Euclid’ s algorithm for computing
greatest common divisors. Next, it studies algorithms for solving modular
linear equations and for raising one number to a power modulo another
number . Then, it explores an important application of number -theoretic
algorithms: the RSA public-key cryptosystem. This cryptosystem can be
used not only to encrypt messages so that an adversary cannot read them,
but also to provide digital signatures. The chapter finishes with the Miller -
Rabin randomized primality test, which enables finding lar ge primes
ef ficiently—an essential requirement for the RSA system.
Chapter 32  studies the problem of finding all occurrences of a given
pattern string in a given text string, a problem that arises frequently in text-
editing programs. After examining the naive approach, the chapter presents
an elegant approach due to Rabin and Karp. Then, after showing an
ef ficient solution based on finite automata, the chapter presents the Knuth-
Morris-Pratt algorithm, which modifies the automaton-based algorithm to
save space by cleverly preprocessing the pattern. The chapter finishes by
studying suf fix arrays, which can not only find a pattern in a text string, but
can do quite a bit more, such as finding the longest repeated substring in a
text and finding the longest common substring appearing in two texts.
Chapter 33  examines three algorithms within the expansive field of
machine learning. Machine-learning algorithms are designed to take in vast
Page number: 880
amounts of data, devise hypotheses about patterns in the data, and test these
hypotheses. The chapter starts with k -means clustering, which groups data
elements into k  classes based on how similar they are to each other . It then
shows how to use the technique of multiplicative weights to make
predictions accurately based on a set of “experts” of varying quality .
Perhaps surprisingly , even without knowing which experts are reliable and
which are not, you can predict almost as accurately as the most reliable
expert. The chapter finishes with gradient descent, an optimization
technique that finds a local minimum value for a function. Gradient descent
has many applications, including finding parameter settings for many
machine-learning models.
Chapter 34  concerns NP-complete problems. Many interesting
computational problems are NP-complete, but no polynomial-time
algorithm is known for solving any of them. This chapter presents
techniques for determining when a problem is NP-complete, using them to
prove several classic problems NP-complete: determining whether a graph
has a hamiltonian cycle (a cycle that includes every vertex), determining
whether a boolean formula is satisfiable (whether there exists an assignment
of boolean values to its variables that causes the formula to evaluate to
TRUE ), and determining whether a given set of numbers has a subset that
adds up to a given tar get value. The chapter also proves that the famous
traveling-salesperson problem (find a shortest route that starts and ends at
the same location and visits each of a set of locations once) is NP-complete.
Chapter 35  shows how to find approximate solutions to NP-complete
problems ef ficiently by using approximation algorithms. For some NP-
complete problems, approximate solutions that are near optimal are quite
easy to produce, but for others even the best approximation algorithms
known work progressively more poorly as the problem size increases. Then,
there are some problems for which investing increasing amounts of
computation time yields increasingly better approximate solutions. This
chapter illustrates these possibilities with the vertex-cover problem
(unweighted and weighted versions), an optimization version of 3-CNF
satisfiability , the traveling-salesperson problem, the set-covering problem,
and the subset-sum problem.
Page number: 881
26        Parallel Algorithms
The vast majority of algorithms in this book are serial algorithms  suitable
for running on a uniprocessor computer that executes only one instruction at
a time. This chapter extends our algorithmic model to encompass parallel
algorithms , where multiple instructions can execute simultaneously .
Specifically , we’ll explore the elegant model of task-parallel algorithms,
which are amenable to algorithmic design and analysis. Our study focuses
on fork-join parallel algorithms, the most basic and best understood kind of
task-parallel algorithm. Fork-join parallel algorithms can be expressed
cleanly using simple linguistic extensions to ordinary serial code.
Moreover , they can be implemented ef ficiently in practice.
Parallel computers—computers with multiple processing units—are
ubiquitous. Handheld, laptop, desktop, and cloud machines are all
multicore computers , or simply , multicores , containing multiple processing
“cores.” Each processing core is a full-fledged processor that can directly
access any location in a common shared memory . Multicores can be
aggregated into lar ger systems, such as clusters, by using a network to
interconnect them. These multicore clusters usually have a distributed
memory , where one multicore’ s memory cannot be accessed directly by a
processor in another multicore. Instead, the processor must explicitly send a
message over the cluster network to a processor in the remote multicore to
request any data it requires. The most powerful clusters are supercomputers,
comprising many thousands of multicores. But since shared-memory
programming tends to be conceptually easier than distributed-memory
programming, and multicore machines are widely available, this chapter
focuses on parallel algorithms for multicores.
Page number: 882
One approach to programming multicores is thread parallelism . This
processor -centric parallel-programming model employs a software
abstraction of “virtual processors,” or threads  that share a common
memory . Each thread maintains its own program counter and can execute
code independently of the other threads. The operating system loads a
thread onto a processing core for execution and switches it out when
another thread needs to run.
Unfortunately , programming a shared-memory parallel computer using
threads tends to be dif ficult and error -prone. One reason is that it can be
complicated to dynamically partition the work among the threads so that
each thread receives approximately the same load. For any but the simplest
of applications, the programmer must use complex communication
protocols to implement a scheduler that load-balances the work.
T ask-parallel pr ogramming
The dif ficulty of thread programming has led to the creation of task-
parallel platforms , which provide a layer of software on top of threads to
coordinate, schedule, and manage the processors of a multicore. Some task-
parallel platforms are built as runtime libraries, but others provide full-
fledged parallel languages with compiler and runtime support.
T ask-parallel programming  allows parallelism to be specified in a
“processor -oblivious” fashion, where the programmer identifies what
computational tasks may run in parallel but does not indicate which thread
or processor performs the task. Thus, the programmer is freed from
worrying about communication protocols, load balancing, and other
vagaries of thread programming. The task-parallel platform contains a
scheduler , which automatically load-balances the tasks across the
processors, thereby greatly simplifying the programmer ’ s chore. T ask-
parallel algorithms  provide a natural extension to ordinary serial
algorithms, allowing performance to be reasoned about mathematically
using “work/span analysis.”
Fork-join parallelism
Although the functionality of task-parallel environments is still evolving
and increasing, almost all support fork-join parallelism , which is typically
embodied in two linguistic features: spawning  and parallel loops .
Page number: 883
Spawning allows a subroutine to be “forked”: executed like a subroutine
call, except that the caller can continue to execute while the spawned
subroutine computes its result. A parallel loop is like an ordinary for  loop,
except that multiple iterations of the loop can execute at the same time.
Fork-join  parallel algorithms employ spawning and parallel loops to
describe parallelism. A key aspect of this parallel model, inherited from the
task-parallel model but dif ferent from the thread model, is that the
programmer does not specify which tasks in a computation must  run in
parallel, only which tasks may  run in parallel. The underlying runtime
system uses threads to load-balance the tasks across the processors. This
chapter investigates parallel algorithms described in the fork-join model, as
well as how the underlying runtime system can schedule task-parallel
computations (which include fork-join computations) ef ficiently .
Fork-join parallelism of fers several important advantages:
The fork-join programming model is a simple extension of the
familiar serial programming model used in most of this book. T o
describe a fork-join parallel algorithm, the pseudocode in this book
needs just three added keywords: parallel , spawn , and sync .
Deleting these parallel keywords from the parallel pseudocode results
in ordinary serial pseudocode for the same problem, which we call
the “serial projection” of the parallel algorithm.
The underlying task-parallel model provides a theoretically clean way
to quantify parallelism based on the notions of “work” and “span.”
Spawning allows many divide-and-conquer algorithms to be
parallelized naturally . Moreover , just as serial divide-and-conquer
algorithms lend themselves to analysis using recurrences, so do
parallel algorithms in the fork-join model.
The fork-join programming model is faithful to how multicore
programming has been evolving in practice. A growing number of
multicore environments support one variant or another of fork-join
parallel programming, including Cilk [ 290 , 291 , 383 , 396 ],
Habanero-Java [ 466 ], the Java Fork-Join Framework [ 279 ], OpenMP
[ 81 ], T ask Parallel Library [ 289 ], Threading Building Blocks [ 376 ],
and X10 [ 82 ].
Page number: 884
Section 26.1  introduces parallel pseudocode, shows how the execution
of a task-parallel computation can be modeled as a directed acyclic graph,
and presents the metrics of work, span, and parallelism, which you can use
to analyze parallel algorithms. Section 26.2  investigates how to multiply
matrices in parallel, and Section 26.3  tackles the tougher problem of
designing an ef ficient parallel mer ge sort.
26.1    The basics of fork-join parallelism
Our exploration of parallel programming begins with the problem of
computing Fibonacci numbers recursively in parallel. W e’ll look at a
straightforward serial Fibonacci calculation, which, although inef ficient,
serves as a good illustration of how to express parallelism in pseudocode.
Recall that the Fibonacci numbers are defined by equation (3.31) on
page 69:
T o calculate the n th Fibonacci number recursively , you could use the
ordinary serial algorithm in the procedure F IB  on the facing page. Y ou
would not really want to compute lar ge Fibonacci numbers this way ,
because this computation does needless repeated work, but parallelizing it
can be instructive.
F IB  ( n )
1 if  n  ≤ 1
2 r eturn  n
3 else  x  = F IB  ( n  − 1)
4 y  = F IB  ( n  − 2)
5 r eturn  x  + y
T o analyze this algorithm, let T  ( n ) denote the running time of F IB  ( n ).
Since F IB  ( n ) contains two recursive calls plus a constant amount of extra
work, we obtain the recurrence
T  ( n ) = T  ( n  − 1) + T  ( n  − 2) + Θ(1).
Page number: 885
This recurrence has solution T  ( n ) = Θ( Fn ), which we can establish by using
the substitution method (see Section 4.3 ). T o show that T  ( n ) = O ( Fn ), we’ll
adopt the inductive hypothesis that T  ( n ) ≤ aFn  − b , where a  > 1 and b  > 0
are constants. Substituting, we obtain
T  ( n ) ≤ ( aF n − 1  − b ) + ( aF n − 2  − b ) + Θ(1)
= a ( F n −1  + F n −2 ) − 2 b  + Θ(1)
≤ aF n  − b ,
if we choose b  lar ge enough to dominate the upper -bound constant in the
Θ(1) term. W e can then choose a  lar ge enough to upper -bound the Θ(1)
base case for small n . T o show that T  ( n ) = Ω( Fn ), we use the inductive
hypothesis T  ( n ) ≥ aFn  − b . Substituting and following reasoning similar to
the asymptotic upper -bound ar gument, we establish this hypothesis by
choosing b  smaller than the lower -bound constant in the Θ(1) term and a
small enough to lower -bound the Θ(1) base case for small n . Theorem 3.1
on page 56 then establishes that T  ( n ) = Θ( Fn ), as desired. Since Fn  = Θ( ϕn),
where 
  is the golden ratio, by equation (3.34) on page 69, it
follows that
Thus this procedure is a particularly slow way to compute Fibonacci
numbers, since it runs in exponential time. (See Problem 31-3 on page 954
for faster ways.)
Let’ s see why the algorithm is inef ficient. Figure 26.1  shows the tree of
recursive procedure instances created when computing F6  with the F IB
procedure. The call to F IB (6) recursively calls F IB (5) and then F IB (4). But,
the call to F IB (5) also results in a call to F IB (4). Both instances of F IB (4)
return the same result ( F4  = 3). Since the F IB  procedure does not memoize
(recall the definition of “memoize” from page 368), the second call to
F IB (4) replicates the work that the first call performs, which is wasteful.
Page number: 886
Figur e 26.1  The invocation tree for F IB (6). Each node in the tree represents a procedure instance
whose children are the procedure instances it calls during its execution. Since each instance of F IB
with the same ar gument does the same work to produce the same result, the inef ficiency of this
algorithm for computing the Fibonacci numbers can be seen by the vast number of repeated calls to
compute the same thing. The portion of the tree shaded blue appears in task-parallel form in Figure
26.2 .
Although the F IB  procedure is a poor way to compute Fibonacci
numbers, it can help us warm up to parallelism concepts. Perhaps the most
basic concept is to understand is that if two parallel tasks operate on entirely
dif ferent data, then—absent other interference—they each produce the same
outcomes when executed at the same time as when they run serially one
after the other . W ithin F IB  ( n ), for example, the two recursive calls in line 3
to F IB  ( n  − 1) and in line 4 to F IB  ( n  − 2) can safely execute in parallel
because the computation performed by one in no way af fects the other .
Parallel keywords
The P-F IB  procedure on the next page computes Fibonacci numbers, but
using the parallel keywords  spawn  and sync  to indicate parallelism in the
pseudocode.
If the keywords spawn  and sync  are deleted from P-F IB , the resulting
pseudocode text is identical to F IB  (other than renaming the procedure in the
header and in the two recursive calls). W e define the serial projection1 of a
parallel algorithm to be the serial algorithm that results from ignoring the
parallel directives, which in this case can be done by omitting the keywords
Page number: 887
spawn  and sync . For parallel for  loops, which we’ll see later on, we omit
the keyword parallel . Indeed, our parallel pseudocode possesses the elegant
property that its serial projection is always ordinary serial pseudocode to
solve the same problem.
P-F IB  ( n )
1 if  n  ≤ 1
2 r eturn  n
3 else  x  = spawn  P-F IB  ( n  − 1) //  don’ t wait for subroutine to return
4 y  = P-F IB  ( n  − 2) //  in parallel with spawned subroutine
5 sync //  wait for spawned subroutine to finish
6 r eturn  x  + y
Semantics of parallel keywords
Spawning  occurs when the keyword spawn  precedes a procedure call, as in
line 3 of P-F IB . The semantics of a spawn dif fers from an ordinary
procedure call in that the procedure instance that executes the spawn—the
parent —may continue to execute in parallel with the spawned subroutine—
its child —instead of waiting for the child to finish, as would happen in a
serial execution. In this case, while the spawned child is computing P-F IB  ( n
− 1), the parent may go on to compute P-F IB  ( n −2) in line 4 in parallel with
the spawned child. Since the P-F IB  procedure is recursive, these two
subroutine calls themselves create nested parallelism, as do their children,
thereby creating a potentially vast tree of subcomputations, all executing in
parallel.
The keyword spawn  does not say , however , that a procedure must
execute in parallel with its spawned children, only that it may . The parallel
keywords express the logical parallelism  of the computation, indicating
which parts of the computation may proceed in parallel. At runtime, it is up
to a scheduler  to determine which subcomputations actually run in parallel
by assigning them to available processors as the computation unfolds. W e’ll
discuss the theory behind task-parallel schedulers shortly (on page 759).
A procedure cannot safely use the values returned by its spawned
children until after it executes a sync  statement, as in line 5. The keyword
sync  indicates that the procedure must wait as necessary for all its spawned
children to finish before proceeding to the statement after the sync —the
“join” of a fork-join parallel computation. The P-F IB  procedure requires a
Page number: 888
sync  before the r eturn  statement in line 6 to avoid the anomaly that would
occur if x  and y  were summed before P-F IB  ( n  − 1) had finished and its
return value had been assigned to x . In addition to explicit join
synchronization provided by the sync  statement, it is convenient to assume
that every procedure executes a sync  implicitly before it returns, thus
ensuring that all children finish before their parent finishes.
A graph model for parallel execution
It helps to view the execution of a parallel computation—the dynamic
stream of runtime instructions executed by processors under the direction of
a parallel program—as a directed acyclic graph G  = ( V , E ), called a
(parallel) trace .2 Conceptually , the vertices in V  are executed instructions,
and the edges in E  represent dependencies between instructions, where ( u ,
v ) ∈  E  means that the parallel program required instruction u  to execute
before instruction v .
It’ s sometimes inconvenient, especially if we want to focus on the
parallel structure of a computation, for a vertex of a trace to represent only
one executed instruction. Consequently , if a chain of instructions contains
no parallel or procedural control (no spawn , sync , procedure call, or r eturn
—via either an explicit r eturn  statement or the return that happens
implicitly upon reaching the end of a procedure), we group the entire chain
into a single strand . As an example, Figure 26.2  shows the trace that results
from computing P-F IB (4) in the portion of Figure 26.1  shaded blue. Strands
do not include instructions that involve parallel or procedural control. These
control dependencies must be represented as edges in the trace.
When a parent procedure calls a child, the trace contains an edge ( u , v )
from the strand u  in the parent that executes the call to the first strand v  of
the spawned child, as illustrated in Figure 26.2  by the edge from the orange
strand in P-F IB (4) to the blue strand in P-F IB (2). When the last strand v ′ in
the child returns, the trace contains an edge ( v ′, u ′) to the strand u ′, where u ′
is the successor strand of u  in the parent, as with the edge from the white
strand in P-F IB (2) to the white strand in P-F IB (4).
Page number: 889
Figur e 26.2  The trace of P-F IB (4) corresponding to the shaded portion of Figure 26.1 . Each circle
represents one strand, with blue circles representing any instructions executed in the part of the
procedure (instance) up to the spawn of P-F IB  ( n  − 1) in line 3; orange circles representing the
instructions executed in the part of the procedure that calls P-F IB  ( n  − 2) in line 4 up to the sync  in
line 5, where it suspends until the spawn of P-F IB  ( n  − 1) returns; and white circles representing the
instructions executed in the part of the procedure after the sync , where it sums x  and y , up to the point
where it returns the result. Strands belonging to the same procedure are grouped into a rounded
rectangle, blue for spawned procedures and tan for called procedures. Assuming that each strand
takes unit time, the work is 17 time units, since there are 17 strands, and the span is 8 time units,
since the critical path—shown with blue edges—contains 8 strands.
When the parent spawns a child, however , the trace is a little dif ferent.
The edge ( u , v ) goes from parent to child as with a call, such as the edge
from the blue strand in P-F IB (4) to the blue strand in P-F IB (3), but the trace
contains another edge ( u , u ′) as well, indicating that u ’ s successor strand u ′
can continue to execute while v  is executing. The edge from the blue strand
in P-F IB (4) to the orange strand in P-F IB (4) illustrates one such edge. As
with a call, there is an edge from the last strand v ′ in the child, but with a
spawn, it no longer goes to u ’ s successor . Instead, the edge is ( v ′, x ), where
x  is the strand immediately following the sync  in the parent that ensures that
the child has finished, as with the edge from the white strand in P-F IB (3) to
the white strand in P-F IB (4).
Y ou can figure out what parallel control created a particular trace. If a
strand has two successors, one of them must have been spawned, and if a
strand has multiple predecessors, the predecessors joined because of a sync
statement. Thus, in the general case, the set V  forms the set of strands, and
Page number: 890
the set E  of directed edges represents dependencies between strands
induced by parallel and procedural control. If G  contains a directed path
from strand u  to strand v , we say that the two strands are (logically) in
series . If there is no path in G  either from u  to v  or from v  to u , the strands
are (logically) in parallel .
A fork-join parallel trace can be pictured as a dag of strands embedded
in an invocation tree  of procedure instances. For example, Figure 26.1
shows the invocation tree for F IB (6), which also serves as the invocation
tree for P-F IB (6), the edges between procedure instances now representing
either calls or spawns. Figure 26.2  zooms in on the subtree that is shaded
blue, showing the strands that constitute each procedure instance in P-
F IB (4). All directed edges connecting strands run either within a procedure
or along undirected edges of the invocation tree in Figure 26.1 . (More
general task-parallel traces that are not fork-join traces may contain some
directed edges that do not run along the undirected tree edges.)
Our analyses generally assume that parallel algorithms execute on an
ideal parallel computer , which consists of a set of processors and a
sequentially consistent  shared memory . T o understand sequential
consistency , you first need to know that memory is accessed by load
instructions , which copy data from a location in the memory to a register
within a processor , and by store instructions , which copy data from a
processor register to a location in the memory . A single line of pseudocode
can entail several such instructions. For example, the line x  = y  + z  could
result in load instructions to fetch each of y  and z  from memory into a
processor , an instruction to add them together inside the processor , and a
store instruction to place the result x  back into memory . In a parallel
computer , several processors might need to load or store at the same time.
Sequential consistency means that even if multiple processors attempt to
access the memory simultaneously , the shared memory behaves as if
exactly one instruction from one of the processors is executed at a time,
even though the actual transfer of data may happen at the same time. It is as
if the instructions were executed one at a time sequentially according to
some global linear order among all the processors that preserves the
individual orders in which each processor executes its own instructions.
For task-parallel computations, which are scheduled onto processors
automatically by a runtime system, the sequentially consistent shared
memory behaves as if a parallel computation’ s executed instructions were
Page number: 891
executed one by one in the order of a topological sort (see Section 20.4 ) of
its trace. That is, you can reason about the execution by imagining that the
individual instructions (not generally the strands, which may aggregate
many instructions) are interleaved in some linear order that preserves the
partial order of the trace. Depending on scheduling, the linear order could
vary from one run of the program to the next, but the behavior of any
execution is always as if the instructions executed serially in a linear order
consistent with the dependencies within the trace.
In addition to making assumptions about semantics, the ideal parallel-
computer model makes some performance assumptions. Specifically , it
assumes that each processor in the machine has equal computing power ,
and it ignores the cost of scheduling. Although this last assumption may
sound optimistic, it turns out that for algorithms with suf ficient
“parallelism” (a term we’ll define precisely a little later), the overhead of
scheduling is generally minimal in practice.
Performance measur es
W e can gauge the theoretical ef ficiency of a task-parallel algorithm using
work/span analysis , which is based on two metrics: “work” and “span.”
The work  of a task-parallel computation is the total time to execute the
entire computation on one processor . In other words, the work is the sum of
the times taken by each of the strands. If each strand takes unit time, the
work is just the number of vertices in the trace. The span  is the fastest
possible time to execute the computation on an unlimited number of
processors, which corresponds to the sum of the times taken by the strands
along a longest path in the trace, where “longest” means that each strand is
weighted by its execution time. Such a longest path is called the critical
path  of the trace, and thus the span is the weight of the longest (weighted)
path in the trace. ( Section 22.2 , pages 617–619 shows how to find a critical
path in a dag G  = ( V , E ) in Θ( V  + E ) time.) For a trace in which each strand
takes unit time, the span equals the number of strands on the critical path.
For example, the trace of Figure 26.2  has 17 vertices in all and 8 vertices on
its critical path, so that if each strand takes unit time, its work is 17 time
units and its span is 8 time units.
The actual running time of a task-parallel computation depends not only
on its work and its span, but also on how many processors are available and
how the scheduler allocates strands to processors. T o denote the running
Page number: 892
time of a task-parallel computation on P  processors, we subscript by P . For
example, we might denote the running time of an algorithm on P  processors
by TP . The work is the running time on a single processor , or T1 . The span
is the running time if we could run each strand on its own processor—in
other words, if we had an unlimited number of processors—and so we
denote the span by T∞ .
The work and span provide lower bounds on the running time TP  of a
task-parallel computation on P  processors:
In one step, an ideal parallel computer with P  processors can do at
most P  units of work, and thus in TP  time, it can perform at most P
TP  work. Since the total work to do is T1 , we have P TP  ≥ T1 .
Dividing by P  yields the work law :
A P -processor ideal parallel computer cannot run any faster than a
machine with an unlimited number of processors. Looked at another
way , a machine with an unlimited number of processors can emulate
a P -processor machine by using just P  of its processors. Thus, the
span law  follows:
W e define the speedup  of a computation on P  processors by the ratio
T1 / TP , which says how many times faster the computation runs on P
processors than on one processor . By the work law , we have TP  ≥ T1 / P ,
which implies that T1 / TP  ≤ P . Thus, the speedup on a P -processor ideal
parallel computer can be at most P . When the speedup is linear in the
number of processors, that is, when T1 / TP  = Θ( P ), the computation exhibits
linear speedup . Perfect linear speedup  occurs when T1 / TP  = P .
The ratio T1 / T∞  of the work to the span gives the parallelism  of the
parallel computation. W e can view the parallelism from three perspectives.
As a ratio, the parallelism denotes the average amount of work that can be
performed in parallel for each step along the critical path. As an upper
bound, the parallelism gives the maximum possible speedup that can be
achieved on any number of processors. Perhaps most important, the
parallelism provides a limit on the possibility of attaining perfect linear
Page number: 893
speedup. Specifically , once the number of processors exceeds the
parallelism, the computation cannot possibly achieve perfect linear
speedup. T o see this last point, suppose that P  > T1 / T∞ , in which case the
span law implies that the speedup satisfies T1 / TP  ≤ T1 / T∞  < P . Moreover , if
the number P  of processors in the ideal parallel computer greatly exceeds
the parallelism—that is, if P  ≫  T1 / T∞ —then T1 / TP  ≪  P , so that the
speedup is much less than the number of processors. In other words, if the
number of processors exceeds the parallelism, adding even more processors
makes the speedup less perfect.
As an example, consider the computation P-F IB (4) in Figure 26.2 , and
assume that each strand takes unit time. Since the work is T1  = 17 and the
span is T∞  = 8, the parallelism is T1 / T∞  = 17/8 = 2.125. Consequently ,
achieving much more than double the performance is impossible, no matter
how many processors execute the computation. For lar ger input sizes,
however , we’ll see that P-F IB  ( n ) exhibits substantial parallelism.
W e define the (parallel) slackness  of a task-parallel computation
executed on an ideal parallel computer with P  processors to be the ratio
( T1 / T∞ )/ P  = T1 /( P T∞ ), which is the factor by which the parallelism of the
computation exceeds the number of processors in the machine. Restating
the bounds on speedup, if the slackness is less than 1, perfect linear speedup
is impossible, because T1 /( P T∞ ) < 1 and the span law imply that T1 / TP  ≤
T1 / T∞  < P . Indeed, as the slackness decreases from 1 and approaches 0, the
speedup of the computation diver ges further and further from perfect linear
speedup. If the slackness is less than 1, additional parallelism in an
algorithm can have a great impact on its execution ef ficiency . If the
slackness is greater than 1, however , the work per processor is the limiting
constraint. W e’ll see that as the slackness increases from 1, a good
scheduler can achieve closer and closer to perfect linear speedup. But once
the slackness is much greater than 1, the advantage of additional parallelism
shows diminishing returns.
Scheduling
Good performance depends on more than just minimizing the work and
span. The strands must also be scheduled ef ficiently onto the processors of
the parallel machine. Our fork-join parallel-programming model provides
Page number: 894
no way for a programmer to specify which strands to execute on which
processors. Instead, we rely on the runtime system’ s scheduler to map the
dynamically unfolding computation to individual processors. In practice,
the scheduler maps the strands to static threads, and the operating system
schedules the threads on the processors themselves. But this extra level of
indirection is unnecessary for our understanding of scheduling. W e can just
imagine that the scheduler maps strands to processors directly .
A task-parallel scheduler must schedule the computation without
knowing in advance when procedures will be spawned or when they will
finish—that is, it must operate online . Moreover , a good scheduler operates
in a distributed fashion, where the threads implementing the scheduler
cooperate to load-balance the computation. Provably good online,
distributed schedulers exist, but analyzing them is complicated. Instead, to
keep our analysis simple, we’ll consider an online centralized  scheduler
that knows the global state of the computation at any moment.
In particular , we’ll analyze greedy schedulers , which assign as many
strands to processors as possible in each time step, never leaving a
processor idle if there is work that can be done. W e’ll classify each step of a
greedy scheduler as follows:
Complete step : At least P  strands are ready  to execute, meaning that
all strands on which they depend have finished execution. A greedy
scheduler assigns any P  of the ready strands to the processors,
completely utilizing all the processor resources.
Incomplete step : Fewer than P  strands are ready to execute. A greedy
scheduler assigns each ready strand to its own processor , leaving
some processors idle for the step, but executing all the ready strands.
The work law tells us that the fastest running time TP  that we can hope
for on P  processors must be at least T1 / P . The span law tells us that the
fastest possible running time must be at least T∞ . The following theorem
shows that greedy scheduling is provably good in that it achieves the sum of
these two lower bounds as an upper bound.
Theorem 26.1
On an ideal parallel computer with P  processors, a greedy scheduler
executes a task-parallel computation with work T1  and span T∞  in time
Page number: 895
Proof    W ithout loss of generality , assume that each strand takes unit time.
(If necessary , replace each longer strand by a chain of unit-time strands.)
W e’ll consider complete and incomplete steps separately .
In each complete step, the P  processors together perform a total of P
work. Thus, if the number of complete steps is k , the total work executing
all the complete steps is kP . Since the greedy scheduler doesn’ t execute any
strand more than once and only T1  work needs to be performed, it follows
that kP  ≤ T1 , from which we can conclude that the number k  of complete
steps is at most T1 / P .
Now , let’ s consider an incomplete step. Let G  be the trace for the entire
computation, let G ′ be the subtrace of G  that has yet to be executed at the
start of the incomplete step, and let G ″ be the subtrace remaining to be
executed after the incomplete step. Consider the set R  of strands that are
ready at the beginning of the incomplete step, where | R | < P . By definition,
if a strand is ready , all its predecessors in trace G  have executed. Thus the
predecessors of strands in R  do not belong to G ′. A longest path in G ′ must
necessarily start at a strand in R , since every other strand in G ′ has a
predecessor and thus could not start a longest path. Because the greedy
scheduler executes all ready strands during the incomplete step, the strands
of G ″ are exactly those in G ′ minus the strands in R . Consequently , the
length of a longest path in G ″ must be 1 less than the length of a longest
path in G ′. In other words, every incomplete step decreases the span of the
trace remaining to be executed by 1. Hence, the number of incomplete steps
can be at most T∞ .
Since each step is either complete or incomplete, the theorem follows.
▪
The following corollary shows that a greedy scheduler always performs
well.
Corollary 26.2
The running time TP  of any task-parallel computation scheduled by a
greedy scheduler on a P -processor ideal parallel computer is within a factor
of 2 of optimal.
Page number: 896
Proof    Let T *P  be the running time produced by an optimal scheduler on a
machine with P  processors, and let T1  and T∞  be the work and span of the
computation, respectively . Since the work and span laws—inequalities
(26.2) and (26.3)—give 
 , Theorem 26.1 implies that
▪
The next corollary shows that, in fact, a greedy scheduler achieves near -
perfect linear speedup on any task-parallel computation as the slackness
grows.
Corollary 26.3
Let TP  be the running time of a task-parallel computation produced by a
greedy scheduler on an ideal parallel computer with P  processors, and let T1
and T∞ be the work and span of the computation, respectively . Then, if P  ≪
T1 / T∞ , or equivalently , the parallel slackness is much greater than 1, we
have TP  ≈ T1 / P , a speedup of approximately P .
Proof    If we suppose that P  ≪  T1 / T∞ , then it follows that T∞  ≪  T1 / P , and
hence Theorem 26.1 gives TP  ≤ T1 / P  + T∞  ≈ T1 / P . Since the work law
(26.2) dictates that TP  ≥ T1 / P , we conclude that TP  ≈ T1 / P , which is a
speedup of T1 / TP  ≈ P .
▪
The ≪  symbol denotes “much less,” but how much is “much less”? As
a rule of thumb, a slackness of at least 10—that is, 10 times more
parallelism than processors—generally suf fices to achieve good speedup.
Then, the span term in the greedy bound, inequality (26.4), is less than 10%
of the work-per -processor term, which is good enough for most engineering
situations. For example, if a computation runs on only 10 or 100 processors,
it doesn’ t make sense to value parallelism of, say 1,000,000, over
parallelism of 10,000, even with the factor of 100 dif ference. As Problem
26-2 shows, sometimes reducing extreme parallelism yields algorithms that
Page number: 897
are better with respect to other concerns and which still scale up well on
reasonable numbers of processors.
Analyzing parallel algorithms
W e now have all the tools we need to analyze parallel algorithms using
work/span analysis, allowing us to bound an algorithm’ s running time on
any number of processors. Analyzing the work is relatively straightforward,
since it amounts to nothing more than analyzing the running time of an
ordinary serial algorithm, namely , the serial projection of the parallel
algorithm. Y ou should already be familiar with analyzing work, since that is
what most of this textbook is about! Analyzing the span is the new thing
that parallelism engenders, but it’ s generally no harder once you get the
hang of it. Let’ s investigate the basic ideas using the P-F IB  program.
Analyzing the work T1 ( n ) of P-F IB  ( n ) poses no hurdles, because we’ve
already done it. The serial projection of P-F IB  is ef fectively the original F IB
procedure, and hence, we have T1 ( n ) = T  ( n ) = Θ( ϕn) from equation (26.1).
Figure 26.3  illustrates how to analyze the span. If two traces are joined
in series, their spans add to form the span of their composition, whereas if
they are joined in parallel, the span of their composition is the maximum of
the spans of the two traces. As it turns out, the trace of any fork-join parallel
computation can be built up from single strands by series-parallel
composition.
Figur e 26.3  Series-parallel composition of parallel traces. (a)  When two traces are joined in series,
the work of the composition is the sum of their work, and the span of the composition is the sum of
their spans. (b)  When two traces are joined in parallel, the work of the composition remains the sum
of their work, but the span of the composition is only the maximum of their spans.
Page number: 898
Armed with an understanding of series-parallel composition, we can
analyze the span of P-F IB  ( n ). The spawned call to P-F IB  ( n  − 1) in line 3
runs in parallel with the call to P-F IB  ( n  − 2) in line 4. Hence, we can
express the span of P-F IB  ( n ) as the recurrence
T ∞ ( n ) = max { T ∞ ( n  − 1), T ∞ ( n  − 2)} + Θ(1)
= T ∞ ( n  − 1) + Θ(1),
which has solution T∞ ( n ) = Θ( n ). (The second equality above follows from
the first because P-F IB  ( n  − 1) uses P-F IB  ( n  − 2) in its computation, so that
the span of P-F IB  ( n  − 1) must be at least as lar ge as the span of P-F IB  ( n  −
2).)
The parallelism of P-F IB  ( n ) is T1 ( n )/ T∞ ( n ) = Θ( ϕn/ n ), which grows
dramatically as n  gets lar ge. Thus, Corollary 26.3 tells us that on even the
lar gest parallel computers, a modest value for n  suf fices to achieve near
perfect linear speedup for P-F IB  ( n ), because this procedure exhibits
considerable parallel slackness.
Parallel loops
Many algorithms contain loops for which all the iterations can operate in
parallel. Although the spawn  and sync  keywords can be used to parallelize
such loops, it is more convenient to specify directly that the iterations of
such loops can run in parallel. Our pseudocode provides this functionality
via the parallel  keyword, which precedes the for  keyword in a for  loop
statement.
As an example, consider the problem of multiplying a square n  × n
matrix A  = ( aij ) by an n -vector x  = ( xj ). The resulting n -vector y  = ( yi ) is
given by the equation
for i  = 1, 2, … , n . The P-M A T -V EC  procedure performs matrix-vector
multiplication (actually , y  = y  + Ax ) by computing all the entries of y  in
parallel. The parallel for  keywords in line 1 of P-M A T -V EC  indicate that the
n  iterations of the loop body , which includes a serial for  loop, may be run in
Page number: 899
parallel. The initialization y  = 0, if desired, should be performed before
calling the procedure (and can be done with a parallel for  loop).
P-M A T -V EC  ( A , x , y , n )
1 parallel for  i  = 1 to  n //  parallel loop
2 for  j  = 1 to  n //  serial loop
3 y i  = y i  + a ij  x j
Compilers for fork-join parallel programs can implement parallel for
loops in terms of spawn  and sync  by using recursive spawning. For
example, for the parallel for  loop in lines 1–3, a compiler can generate the
auxiliary subroutine P-M A T -V EC -R ECURSIVE  and call P-M A T -V EC -
R ECURSIVE  ( A , x , y , n , 1, n ) in the place where the loop would be in the
compiled code. As Figure 26.4  illustrates, this procedure recursively
spawns the first half of the iterations of the loop to execute in parallel (line
5) with the second half of the iterations (line 6) and then executes a sync
(line 7), thereby creating a binary tree of parallel execution. Each leaf
represents a base case, which is the serial for  loop of lines 2–3.
P-M A T -V EC -R ECURSIVE  ( A , x , y , n , i , i′ )
1 if  i  == i ′ //  just one iteration to do?
2 for  j  = 1 to  n //  mimic P-M A T -V EC  serial loop
3 y i  = y i  + a ij  x j
4 else  mid  = ⌊ ( i  + i ′)/2 ⌋ //  parallel divide-and-conquer
5 spawn  P-M A T -V EC -R ECURSIVE  ( A , x , y , n , i , mid )
6 P-M A T -V EC -R ECURSIVE  ( A , x , y , n , mid  + 1, i′ )
7 sync
T o calculate the work T1 ( n ) of P-M A T -V EC  on an n × n  matrix, simply
compute the running time of its serial projection, which comes from
replacing the parallel  for  loop in line 1 with an ordinary for  loop. The
running time of the resulting serial pseudocode is Θ( n2), which means that
T1 ( n ) = Θ( n2). This analysis seems to ignore the overhead for recursive
spawning in implementing the parallel loops, however . Indeed, the
overhead of recursive spawning does increase the work of a parallel loop
compared with that of its serial projection, but not asymptotically . T o see
why , observe that since the tree of recursive procedure instances is a full
Page number: 900
binary tree, the number of internal nodes is one less than the number of
leaves (see Exercise B.5-3 on page 1 175). Each internal node performs
constant work to divide the iteration range, and each leaf corresponds to a
base case, which takes at least constant time (Θ( n ) time in this case). Thus,
by amortizing the overhead of recursive spawning over the work of the
iterations in the leaves, we see that the overall work increases by at most a
constant factor .
Figur e 26.4  A trace for the computation of P-M A T -V EC -R ECURSIVE  ( A , x , y , 8, 1, 8). The two
numbers within each rounded rectangle give the values of the last two parameters ( i  and i ′ in the
procedure header) in the invocation (spawn, in blue, or call, in tan) of the procedure. The blue circles
represent strands corresponding to the part of the procedure up to the spawn of P-M A T -V EC -
R ECURSIVE  in line 5. The orange circles represent strands corresponding to the part of the
procedure that calls P-M A T -V EC -R ECURSIVE  in line 6 up to the sync  in line 7, where it suspends
until the spawned subroutine in line 5 returns. The white circles represent strands corresponding to
the (negligible) part of the procedure after the sync  up to the point where it returns.
T o reduce the overhead of recursive spawning, task-parallel platforms
sometimes coarsen  the leaves of the recursion by executing several
iterations in a single leaf, either automatically or under programmer control.
This optimization comes at the expense of reducing the parallelism. If the
computation has suf ficient parallel slackness, however , near -perfect linear
speedup won’ t be sacrificed.
Although recursive spawning doesn’ t af fect the work of a parallel loop
asymptotically , we must take it into account when analyzing the span.
Consider a parallel loop with n  iterations in which the i th iteration has span
Page number: 901
iter∞ ( i ). Since the depth of recursion is logarithmic in the number of
iterations, the parallel loop’ s span is
T∞ ( n ) = Θ(lg n ) + max { iter∞ ( i ) : 1 ≤ i  ≤ n }.
For example, let’ s compute the span of the doubly nested loops in lines
1–3 of P-M A T -V EC . The span for the parallel for  loop control is Θ(lg n ).
For each iteration of the outer parallel loop, the inner serial for  loop
contains n  iterations of line 3. Since each iteration takes constant time, the
total span for the inner serial for  loop is Θ( n ), no matter which iteration of
the outer parallel for  loop it’ s in. Thus, taking the maximum over all
iterations of the outer loop and adding in the Θ(lg n ) for loop control yields
an overall span of T∞ n  = Θ( n ) + Θ(lg n ) = Θ( n ) for the procedure. Since the
work is Θ( n2), the parallelism is Θ( n2)/Θ( n ) = Θ( n ). (Exercise 26.1-7 asks
you to provide an implementation with even more parallelism.)
Race conditions
A parallel algorithm is deterministic  if it always does the same thing on the
same input, no matter how the instructions are scheduled on the multicore
computer . It is nondeterministic  if its behavior might vary from run to run
when the input is the same. A parallel algorithm that is intended to be
deterministic may nevertheless act nondeterministically , however , if it
contains a dif ficult-to-diagnose bug called a “determinacy race.”
Famous race bugs include the Therac-25 radiation therapy machine,
which killed three people and injured several others, and the Northeast
Blackout of 2003, which left over 50 million people in the United States
without power . These pernicious bugs are notoriously hard to find. Y ou can
run tests in the lab for days without a failure, only to discover that your
software sporadically crashes in the field, sometimes with dire
consequences.
A determinacy race  occurs when two logically parallel instructions
access the same memory location and at least one of the instructions
modifies the value stored in the location. The toy procedure R ACE -E XAMPLE
on the following page illustrates a determinacy race. After initializing x  to 0
in line 1, R ACE -E XAMPLE  creates two parallel strands, each of which
increments x  in line 3. Although it might seem that a call of R ACE -E XAMPLE
Page number: 902
should always print the value 2 (its serial projection certainly does), it could
instead print the value 1. Let’ s see how this anomaly might occur .
When a processor increments x , the operation is not indivisible, but is
composed of a sequence of instructions:
Figur e 26.5  Illustration of the determinacy race in R ACE -E XAMPLE . (a)  A trace showing the
dependencies among individual instructions. The processor registers are r 1  and r 2 . Instructions
unrelated to the race, such as the implementation of loop control, are omitted. (b)  An execution
sequence that elicits the bug, showing the values of x  in memory and registers r 1  and r 2  for each step
in the execution sequence.
R ACE -E XAMPLE  ( )
1 x  = 0
2 parallel for  i  = 1 to  2
3 x  = x  + 1 //  determinacy race
4 print x
Load x  from memory into one of the processor ’ s registers.
Increment the value in the register .
Store the value in the register back into x  in memory .
Figure 26.5(a)  illustrates a trace representing the execution of R ACE -
E XAMPLE , with the strands broken down to individual instructions. Recall
that since an ideal parallel computer supports sequential consistency , you
can view the parallel execution of a parallel algorithm as an interleaving of
instructions that respects the dependencies in the trace. Part (b) of the figure
Page number: 903
shows the values in an execution of the computation that elicits the
anomaly . The value x  is kept in memory , and r1  and r2  are processor
registers. In step 1, one of the processors sets x  to 0. In steps 2 and 3,
processor 1 loads x  from memory into its register r1  and increments it,
producing the value 1 in r1 . At that point, processor 2 comes into the
picture, executing instructions 4–6. Processor 2 loads x  from memory into
register r2 ; increments it, producing the value 1 in r2 ; and then stores this
value into x , setting x  to 1. Now , processor 1 resumes with step 7, storing
the value 1 in r1  into x , which leaves the value of x  unchanged. Therefore,
step 8 prints the value 1, rather than the value 2 that the serial projection
would print.
Let’ s recap what happened. By sequential consistency , the ef fect of the
parallel execution is as if the executed instructions of the two processors are
interleaved. If processor 1 executes all its instructions before processor 2, a
trivial interleaving, the value 2 is printed. Conversely , if processor 2
executes all its instructions before processor 1, the value 2 is still printed.
When the instructions of the two processors interleave nontrivially ,
however , it is possible, as in this example execution, that one of the updates
to x  is lost, resulting in the value 1 being printed.
Of course, many executions do not elicit the bug. That’ s the problem
with determinacy races. Generally , most instruction orderings produce
correct results, such as any where the instructions on the left branch execute
before the instructions on the right branch, or vice versa. But some
orderings generate improper results when the instructions interleave.
Consequently , races can be extremely hard to test for . Y our program may
fail, but you may be unable to reliably reproduce the failure in subsequent
tests, confounding your attempts to locate the bug in your code and fix it.
T ask-parallel programming environments often provide race-detection
productivity tools to help you isolate race bugs.
Many parallel programs in the real world are intentionally
nondeterministic. They contain determinacy races, but they mitigate the
dangers of nondeterminism through the use of mutual-exclusion locks and
other methods of synchronization. For our purposes, however , we’ll insist
on an absence of determinacy races in the algorithms we develop.
Nondeterministic programs are indeed interesting, but nondeterministic
Page number: 904
programming is a more advanced topic and unnecessary for a wide swath of
interesting parallel algorithms.
T o ensure that algorithms are deterministic, any two strands that operate
in parallel should be mutually noninterfering : they only read, and do not
modify , any memory locations accessed by both of them. Consequently , in a
parallel for  construct, such as the outer loop of P-M A T -V EC , we want all
the iterations of the body , including any code an iteration executes in
subroutines, to be mutually noninterfering. And between a spawn  and its
corresponding sync , we want the code executed by the spawned child and
the code executed by the parent to be mutually noninterfering, once again
including invoked subroutines.
As an example of how easy it is to write code with unintentional races,
the P-M A T -V EC -W RONG  procedure on the next page is a faulty parallel
implementation of matrix-vector multiplication that achieves a span of Θ(lg
n ) by parallelizing the inner for  loop. This procedure is incorrect,
unfortunately , due to determinacy races when updating yi  in line 3, which
executes in parallel for all n  values of j .
Index variables of parallel for  loops, such as i  in line 1 and j  in line 2,
do not cause races between iterations. Conceptually , each iteration of the
loop creates an independent variable to hold the index of that iteration
during that iteration’ s execution of the loop body . Even if two parallel
iterations both access the same index variable, they really are accessing
dif ferent variable instances—hence dif ferent memory locations—and no
race occurs.
P-M A T -V EC -W RONG  ( A , x , y , n )
1 parallel for  i  = 1 to  n
2 parallel for  j  = 1 to  n
3 y i  = y i  + a ij x j //  determinacy race
A parallel algorithm with races can sometimes be deterministic. As an
example, two parallel threads might store the same value into a shared
variable, and it wouldn’ t matter which stored the value first. For simplicity ,
however , we generally prefer code without determinacy races, even if the
races are benign. And good parallel programmers frown on code with
determinacy races that cause nondeterministic behavior , if deterministic
code that performs comparably is an option.
Page number: 905
But nondeterministic code does have its place. For example, you can’ t
implement a parallel hash table, a highly practical data structure, without
writing code containing determinacy races. Much research has centered
around how to extend the fork-join model to incorporate limited
“structured” nondeterminism while avoiding the full measure of
complications that arise when nondeterminism is completely unrestricted.
A chess lesson
T o illustrate the power of work/span analysis, this section closes with a true
story that occurred during the development of one of the first world-class
parallel chess-playing programs [ 106 ] many years ago. The timings below
have been simplified for exposition.
The chess program was developed and tested on a 32-processor
computer , but it was designed to run on a supercomputer with 512
processors. Since the supercomputer availability was limited and expensive,
the developers ran benchmarks on the small computer and extrapolated
performance to the lar ge computer .
At one point, the developers incorporated an optimization into the
program that reduced its running time on an important benchmark on the
small machine from T32  = 65 seconds to 
  seconds. Y et, the
developers used the work and span performance measures to conclude that
the optimized version, which was faster on 32 processors, would actually be
slower than the original version on the 512 processors of the lar ge machine.
As a result, they abandoned the “optimization.”
Here is their work/span analysis. The original version of the program
had work T1  = 2048 seconds and span T∞ = 1 second. Let’ s treat inequality
(26.4) on page 760 as the equation TP  = T1 / P  + T∞ , which we can use as an
approximation to the running time on P  processors. Then indeed we have
T32  = 2048/32 + 1 = 65. W ith the optimization, the work becomes T ′1  =
1024 seconds, and the span becomes T ′∞  = 8 seconds. Our approximation
gives T ′32  = 1024/32 + 8 = 40.
The relative speeds of the two versions switch when we estimate their
running times on 512 processors, however . The first version has a running
time of T512  = 2048/512+1 = 5 seconds, and the second version runs in 
 seconds. The optimization that speeds up the
Page number: 906
program on 32 processors makes the program run for twice as long on 512
processors! The optimized version’ s span of 8, which is not the dominant
term in the running time on 32 processors, becomes the dominant term on
512 processors, nullifying the advantage from using more processors. The
optimization does not scale up.
The moral of the story is that work/span analysis, and measurements of
work and span, can be superior to measured running times alone in
extrapolating an algorithm’ s scalability .
Exer cises
26.1-1
What does a trace for the execution of a serial algorithm look like?
26.1-2
Suppose that line 4 of P-F IB  spawns P-F IB  ( n  − 2), rather than calling it as is
done in the pseudocode. How would the trace of P-F IB (4) in Figure 26.2
change? What is the impact on the asymptotic work, span, and parallelism?
26.1-3
Draw the trace that results from executing P-F IB (5). Assuming that each
strand in the computation takes unit time, what are the work, span, and
parallelism of the computation? Show how to schedule the trace on 3
processors using greedy scheduling by labeling each strand with the time
step in which it is executed.
26.1-4
Prove that a greedy scheduler achieves the following time bound, which is
slightly stronger than the bound proved in Theorem 26.1:
26.1-5
Construct a trace for which one execution by a greedy scheduler can take
nearly twice the time of another execution by a greedy scheduler on the
same number of processors. Describe how the two executions would
proceed.
26.1-6
Page number: 907
Professor Karan measures her deterministic task-parallel algorithm on 4, 10,
and 64 processors of an ideal parallel computer using a greedy scheduler .
She claims that the three runs yielded T4  = 80 seconds, T10  = 42 seconds,
and T64  = 10 seconds. Ar gue that the professor is either lying or
incompetent. ( Hint:  Use the work law (26.2), the span law (26.3), and
inequality (26.5) from Exercise 26.1-4.)
26.1-7
Give a parallel algorithm to multiply an n  × n  matrix by an n -vector that
achieves Θ( n2/lg n ) parallelism while maintaining Θ( n2) work.
26.1-8
Analyze the work, span, and parallelism of the procedure P-T RANSPOSE ,
which transposes an n  × n  matrix A  in place.
P-T RANSPOSE  ( A , n )
1 parallel for  j  = 2 to  n
2 parallel for  i  = 1 to  j  − 1
3 exchange a ij  with a ji
26.1-9
Suppose that instead of a parallel for  loop in line 2, the P-T RANSPOSE
procedure in Exercise 26.1-8 had an ordinary for  loop. Analyze the work,
span, and parallelism of the resulting algorithm.
26.1-10
For what number of processors do the two versions of the chess program
run equally fast, assuming that TP  = T1 / P  + T∞ ?
26.2    Parallel matrix multiplication
In this section, we’ll explore how to parallelize the three matrix-
multiplication algorithms from Sections 4.1  and 4.2 . W e’ll see that each
algorithm can be parallelized in a straightforward fashion using either
parallel loops or recursive spawning. W e’ll analyze them using work/span
analysis, and we’ll see that each parallel algorithm attains the same
Page number: 908
performance on one processor as its corresponding serial algorithm, while
scaling up to lar ge numbers of processors.
A parallel algorithm for matrix multiplication using parallel loops
The first algorithm we’ll study is P-M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y , which simply
parallelizes the two outer loops in the procedure M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y  on page
81.
P-M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y  ( A , B , C , n )
1 parallel for  i  = 1 to  n //  compute entries in each of n  rows
2 parallel for  j  = 1 to  n //  compute n  entries in row i
3 for  k  = 1 to  n
4 c ij  = c ij  + a ik  · b kj //  add in another term of equation (4.1)
Let’ s analyze P-M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y . Since the serial projection of the
algorithm is just M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y , the work is the same as the running
time of M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y : T1 ( n ) = Θ( n3). The span is T∞ ( n ) = Θ( n ),
because it follows a path down the tree of recursion for the parallel for
loop starting in line 1, then down the tree of recursion for the parallel for
loop starting in line 2, and then executes all n  iterations of the ordinary for
loop starting in line 3, resulting in a total span of Θ(lg n ) + Θ(lg n ) + Θ( n ) =
Θ( n ). Thus the parallelism is Θ( n3)/Θ( n ) = Θ( n2). (Exercise 26.2-3 asks you
to parallelize the inner loop to obtain a parallelism of Θ( n3/lg n ), which you
cannot do straightforwardly using parallel for , because you would create
races.)
A parallel divide-and-conquer algorithm for matrix multiplication
Section 4.1  shows how to multiply n  × n  matrices serially in Θ( n3) time
using a divide-and-conquer strategy . Let’ s see how to parallelize that
algorithm using recursive spawning instead of calls.
The serial M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y -R ECURSIVE  procedure on page 83 takes as
input three n  × n  matrices A , B , and C  and performs the matrix calculation C
= C  + A  · B  by recursively performing eight multiplications of n /2 × n /2
submatrices of A  and B . The P-M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y -R ECURSIVE  procedure on
the following page implements the same divide-and-conquer strategy , but it
uses spawning to perform the eight multiplications in parallel. T o avoid
Page number: 909
determinacy races in updating the elements of C , it creates a temporary
matrix D  to store four of the submatrix products. At the end, it adds C  and
D  together to produce the final result. (Problem 26-2 asks you to eliminate
the temporary matrix D  at the expense of some parallelism.)
Lines 2–3 of P-M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y -R ECURSIVE  handle the base case of
multiplying 1 × 1 matrices. The remainder of the procedure deals with the
recursive case. Line 4 allocates a temporary matrix D , and lines 5–7 zero it.
Line 8 partitions each of the four matrices A , B , C , and D  into n /2 × n /2
submatrices. (As with M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y -R ECURSIVE  on page 83, we’re
glossing over the subtle issue of how to use index calculations to represent
submatrix sections of a matrix.) The spawned recursive call in line 9 sets
C1 1  = C1 1  + A1 1  · B1 1 , so that C1 1  accumulates the first of the two terms in
equation (4.5) on page 82. Similarly , lines 10–12 cause each of C12 , C21 ,
and C22  in parallel to accumulate the first of the two terms in equations
(4.6)–(4.8), respectively . Line 13 sets the submatrix D1 1  to the submatrix
product A12  · B21 , so that D1 1  equals the second of the two terms in equation
(4.5). Lines 14–16 set each of D12 , D21 , and D22  in parallel to the second of
the two terms in equations (4.6)–(4.8), respectively . The sync  statement in
line 17 ensures that all the spawned submatrix products in lines 9–16 have
been computed, after which the doubly nested parallel for  loops in lines
18–20 add the elements of D  to the corresponding elements of C .
P-M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y -R ECURSIVE  ( A , B , C , n )
  1 if  n  == 1 //  just one element in each matrix?
  2 c 1 1  = c 1 1  + a 1 1  · b 1 1
  3 r eturn
  4 let D  be a new n  × n  matrix //  temporary matrix
  5 parallel for  i  = 1 to  n //  set D  = 0
  6 parallel for  j  = 1 to  n
  7 d ij  = 0
  8 partition A , B , C , and D  into n /2 × n /2 submatrices A 1 1 , A 12 , A 21 , A 22 ; B 1 1 , B 12 , B 21 , B 22 ;
C 1 1 , C 12 , C 21 , C 22 ; and D 1 1 , D 12 , D 21 , D 22 ; respectively
  9 spawn  P-M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y -R ECURSIVE  ( A 1 1 , B 1 1 , C 1 1 , n /2)
10 spawn  P-M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y -R ECURSIVE  ( A 1 1 , B 12 , C 12 , n /2)
1 1 spawn  P-M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y -R ECURSIVE  ( A 21 , B 1 1 , C 21 , n /2)
12 spawn  P-M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y -R ECURSIVE  ( A 21 , B 12 , C 22 , n /2)
13 spawn  P-M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y -R ECURSIVE  ( A 12 , B 21 , D 1 1 , n /2)
14 spawn  P-M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y -R ECURSIVE  ( A 12 , B 22 , D 12 , n /2)
Page number: 910
15 spawn  P-M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y -R ECURSIVE  ( A 22 , B 21 , D 21 , n /2)
16 spawn  P-M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y -R ECURSIVE  ( A 22 , B 22 , D 22 , n /2)
17 sync //  wait for spawned submatrix products
18 parallel for  i  = 1 to  n //  update C  = C  + D
19 parallel for  j  = 1 to  n
20 c ij  = c ij  + d ij
Let’ s analyze the P-M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y -R ECURSIVE  procedure. W e start by
analyzing the work M1 ( n ), echoing the serial running-time analysis of its
progenitor M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y -R ECURSIVE . The recursive case allocates and
zeros the temporary matrix D  in Θ( n2) time, partitions in Θ(1) time,
performs eight recursive multiplications of n /2 × n /2 matrices, and finishes
up with the Θ( n2) work from adding two n × n  matrices. Thus the work
outside the spawned recursive calls is Θ( n2), and the recurrence for the
work M1 ( n ) becomes
M 1 ( n ) =8 M 1 ( n /2) + Θ( n2)
=Θ( n3)
by case 1 of the master theorem (Theorem 4.1). Not surprisingly , the work
of this parallel algorithm is asymptotically the same as the running time of
the procedure M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y  on page 81, with its triply nested loops.
Let’ s determine the span M∞ ( n ) of P-M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y -R ECURSIVE .
Because the eight parallel recursive spawns all execute on matrices of the
same size, the maximum span for any recursive spawn is just the span of a
single one of them, or M∞ ( n /2). The span for the doubly nested parallel for
loops in lines 5–7 is Θ(lg n ) because each loop control adds Θ(lg n ) to the
constant span of line 7. Similarly , the doubly nested parallel for  loops in
lines 18–20 add another Θ(lg n ). Matrix partitioning by index calculation
has Θ(1) span, which is dominated by the Θ(lg n ) span of the nested loops.
W e obtain the recurrence
Since this recurrence falls under case 2 of the master theorem with k  = 1,
the solution is M∞ ( n ) = Θ(lg2 n ).
The parallelism of P-M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y -R ECURSIVE  is M1 ( n )/ M∞ ( n ) =
Θ( n3/lg2n ), which is huge. (Problem 26-2 asks you to simplify this parallel
Page number: 911
algorithm at the expense of just a little less parallelism.)
Parallelizing Strassen’ s method
T o parallelize Strassen’ s algorithm, we can follow the same general outline
as on pages 86–87, but use spawning. Y ou may find it helpful to compare
each step below with the corresponding step there. W e’ll analyze costs as
we go along to develop recurrences T1 ( n ) and T∞ ( n ) for the overall work
and span, respectively .
1 . If n  = 1, the matrices each contain a single element. Perform a
single scalar multiplication and a single scalar addition, and return.
Otherwise, partition the input matrices A  and B  and output matrix C
into n /2 × n /2 submatrices, as in equation (4.2) on page 82. This step
takes Θ(1) work and Θ(1) span by index calculation.
2 . Create n /2 × n /2 matrices S1 , S2 , … , S10 , each of which is the sum
or dif ference of two submatrices from step 1. Create and zero the
entries of seven n /2× n /2 matrices P1 , P2 , … , P7  to hold seven
n /2× n /2 matrix products. All 17 matrices can be created, and the Pi
initialized, with doubly nested parallel for  loops using Θ( n2) work
and Θ(lg n ) span.
3 . Using the submatrices from step 1 and the matrices S1 , S2 , … , S10
created in step 2, recursively spawn computations of each of the
seven n /2 × n /2 matrix products P1 , P2 , … , P7 , taking 7 T1 ( n /2)
work and T∞ ( n /2) span.
4 . Update the four submatrices C1 1 , C12 , C21 , C22  of the result matrix
C  by adding or subtracting various Pi  matrices. Using doubly nested
parallel for  loops, computing all four submatrices takes Θ( n2) work
and Θ(lg n ) span.
Let’ s analyze this algorithm. Since the serial projection is the same as
the original serial algorithm, the work is just the running time of the serial
projection, namely , Θ( nlg 7). As we did with P-M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y -
R ECURSIVE , we can devise a recurrence for the span. In this case, seven
recursive calls execute in parallel, but since they all operate on matrices of
the same size, we obtain the same recurrence (26.6) as we did for P-
Page number: 912
M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y -R ECURSIVE , with solution Θ(lg2 n ). Thus the parallel
version of Strassen’ s method has parallelism Θ( nlg 7/lg2 n ), which is lar ge.
Although the parallelism is slightly less than that of P-M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y -
R ECURSIVE , that’ s just because the work is also less.
Exer cises
26.2-1
Draw the trace for computing P-M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y  on 2 × 2 matrices,
labeling how the vertices in your diagram correspond to strands in the
execution of the algorithm. Assuming that each strand executes in unit time,
analyze the work, span, and parallelism of this computation.
26.2-2
Repeat Exercise 26.2-1 for P-M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y -R ECURSIVE .
26.2-3
Give pseudocode for a parallel algorithm that multiplies two n  × n  matrices
with work Θ( n3) but span only Θ(lg n ). Analyze your algorithm.
26.2-4
Give pseudocode for an ef ficient parallel algorithm that multiplies a p  × q
matrix by a q  × r  matrix. Y our algorithm should be highly parallel even if
any of p , q , and r  equal 1. Analyze your algorithm.
26.2-5
Give pseudocode for an ef ficient parallel version of the Floyd-W arshall
algorithm (see Section 23.2 ), which computes shortest paths between all
pairs of vertices in an edge-weighted graph. Analyze your algorithm.
26.3    Parallel merge sort
W e first saw serial mer ge sort in Section 2.3.1 , and in Section 2.3.2  we
analyzed its running time and showed it to be Θ( n  lg n ). Because mer ge sort
already uses the divide-and-conquer method, it seems like a terrific
candidate for implementing using fork-join parallelism.
The procedure P-M ERGE -S OR T  modifies mer ge sort to spawn the first
recursive call. Like its serial counterpart M ERGE -S OR T  on page 39, the P-
Page number: 913
M ERGE -S OR T  procedure sorts the subarray A [ p  : r ]. After the sync  statement
in line 8 ensures that the two recursive spawns in lines 5 and 7 have
finished, P-M ERGE -S OR T  calls the P-M ERGE  procedure, a parallel mer ging
algorithm, which is on page 779, but you don’ t need to bother looking at it
right now .
P-M ERGE -S OR T  ( A , p , r )
  1 if  p  ≥ r //  zero or one element?
  2 r eturn
  3 q  = ⌊ ( p  + r )/2 ⌋ //  midpoint of A [ p  : r ]
  4 //  Recursively sort A [ p  : q ] in parallel.
  5 spawn  P-M ERGE -S OR T  ( A , p , q )
  6 //  Recursively sort A [ q  + 1 : r ] in parallel.
  7 spawn  P-M ERGE -S OR T  ( A , q  + 1, r )
  8 sync //  wait for spawns
  9 //  Mer ge A [ p  : q ] and A [ q  + 1 : r ] into A [ p  : r ].
10 P-M ERGE  ( A , p , q , r )
First, let’ s use work/span analysis to get some intuition for why we need
a parallel mer ge procedure. After all, it may seem as though there should be
plenty of parallelism just by parallelizing M ERGE -S OR T  without worrying
about parallelizing the mer ge. But what would happen if the call to P-
M ERGE  in line 10 of P-M ERGE -S OR T  were replaced by a call to the serial
M ERGE  procedure on page 36? Let’ s call the pseudocode so modified P-
NAIVE-M ERGE -S OR T .
Let T1 ( n ) be the (worst-case) work of P-N AIVE -M ERGE -S OR T  on an n -
element subarray , where n  = r  − p  + 1 is the number of elements in A [ p  : r ],
and let T∞ ( n ) be the span. Because M ERGE  is serial with running time Θ( n ),
both its work and span are Θ( n ). Since the serial projection of P-N AIVE -
M ERGE -S OR T  is exactly M ERGE -S OR T , its work is T1 ( n ) = Θ( n  lg n ). The two
recursive calls in lines 5 and 7 run in parallel, and so its span is given by the
recurrence
T ∞ ( n ) = T ∞ ( n /2) + Θ( n )
= Θ( n ),
by case 1 of the master theorem. Thus the parallelism of P-N AIVE -M ERGE -
S OR T  is T1 ( n )/ T∞ ( n ) = Θ(lg n ), which is an unimpressive amount of
parallelism. T o sort a million elements, for example, since lg 106 ≈ 20, it
Page number: 914
might achieve linear speedup on a few processors, but it would not scale up
to dozens of processors.
The parallelism bottleneck in P-N AIVE -M ERGE -S OR T  is plainly the
M ERGE  procedure. If we asymptotically reduce the span of mer ging, the
master theorem dictates that the span of parallel mer ge sort will also get
smaller . When you look at the pseudocode for M ERGE , it may seem that
mer ging is inherently serial, but it’ s not. W e can fashion a parallel mer ging
algorithm. The goal is to reduce the span of parallel mer ging
asymptotically , but if we want an ef ficient parallel algorithm, we must
ensure that the Θ( n ) bound on work doesn’ t increase.
Figure 26.6  depicts the divide-and-conquer strategy that we’ll use in P-
M ERGE . The heart of the algorithm is a recursive auxiliary procedure P-
M ERGE -A UX  that mer ges two sorted subarrays of an array A  into a subarray
of another array B  in parallel. Specifically , P-M ERGE -A UX  mer ges A [ p1  : r1 ]
and A [ p2  : r2 ] into subarray B [ p3  : r3 ], where r3  = p3  + ( r1  − p1  + 1) + ( r2  −
p2  + 1) − 1 = p3  + ( r1  − p1 ) + ( r2  − p2 ) + 1.
The key idea of the recursive mer ging algorithm in P-M ERGE -A UX  is to
split each of the two sorted subarrays of A  around a pivot x , such that all the
elements in the lower part of each subarray are at most x  and all the
elements in the upper part of each subarray are at least x . The procedure can
then recurse in parallel on two subtasks: mer ging the two lower parts, and
mer ging the two upper parts. The trick is to find a pivot x  so that the
recursion is not too lopsided. W e don’ t want a situation such as that in
Q UICKSOR T  on page 183, where bad partitioning elements lead to a dramatic
loss of asymptotic ef ficiency . W e could opt to partition around a random
element, as R ANDOMIZED -Q UICKSOR T  on page 192 does, but because the
input subarrays are sorted, P-M ERGE -A UX  can quickly determine a pivot
that always works well.
Specifically , the recursive mer ging algorithm picks the pivot x  as the
middle element of the lar ger of the two input subarrays, which we can
assume without loss of generality is A [ p1  : r1 ], since otherwise, the two
subarrays can just switch roles. That is, x  = A [ q1 ], where q1  = ⌊ ( p1  + r1 )/2 ⌋ .
Because A [ p1  : r1 ] is sorted, x  is a median of the subarray elements: every
element in A [ p1  : q1  − 1] is no more than x , and every element in A [ q1  + 1 :
r1 ] is no less than x . Then the algorithm finds the “split point” q2  in the
Page number: 915
smaller subarray A [ p2  : r2 ] such that all the elements in A [ p2  : q2 −1] (if any)
are at most x  and all the elements in A [ q2  : r2 ] (if any) are at least x .
Intuitively , the subarray A [ p2  : r2 ] would still be sorted if x  were inserted
between A [ q2 −1] and A [ q2 ] (although the algorithm doesn’ t do that). Since
A [ p2  : r2 ] is sorted, a minor variant of binary search (see Exercise 2.3-6)
with x  as the search key can find the split point q2  in Θ(lg n ) time in the
worst case. As we’ll see when we get to the analysis, even if x  splits A [ p2  :
r2 ] badly— x  is either smaller than all the subarray elements or lar ger—
we’ll still have at least 1/4 of the elements in each of the two recursive
mer ges. Thus the lar ger of the recursive mer ges operates on at most 3/4
elements, and the recursion is guaranteed to bottom out after Θ(lg n )
recursive calls.
Figur e 26.6  The idea behind P-M ERGE -A UX , which mer ges two sorted subarrays A [ p 1  : r 1 ] and
A [ p 2  : r 2 ] into the subarray B [ p 3  : r 3 ] in parallel. Letting x  = A [ q 1 ] (shown in yellow) be a median of
A [ p 1  : r 1 ] and q 2  be a place in A [ p 2  : r 2 ] such that x  would fall between A [ q 2  − 1] and A [ q 2 ], every
element in the subarrays A [ p 1  : q 1  − 1] and A [ p 2  : q 2  − 1] (shown in orange) is at most x , and every
element in the subarrays A [ q 1  + 1 : r 1 ] and A [ q 2  + 1 : r 2 ] (shown in blue) is at least x . T o mer ge,
compute the index q 3  where x  belongs in B [ p 3  : r 3 ], copy x  into B [ q 3 ], and then recursively mer ge
A [ p 1  : q 1  − 1] with A [ p 2  : q 2  − 1] into B [ p 3  : q 3  − 1] and A [ q 1  + 1 : r 1 ] with A [ q 2  : r 2 ] into B [ q 3  + 1
: r 3 ].
Now let’ s put these ideas into pseudocode. W e start with the serial
procedure F IND -S PLIT -P OINT  ( A , p , r , x ) on the next page, which takes as
input a sorted subarray A [ p  : r ] and a key x . The procedure returns a split
point of A [ p  : r ]: an index q  in the range p  ≤ q  ≤ r  + 1 such that all the
Page number: 916
elements in A [ p  : q  − 1] (if any) are at most x  and all the elements in A [ q  : r ]
(if any) are at least x .
The F IND -S PLIT -P OINT  procedure uses binary search to find the split
point. Lines 1 and 2 establish the range of indices for the search. Each time
through the while  loop, line 5 compares the middle element of the range
with the search key x , and lines 6 and 7 narrow the search range to either
the lower half or the upper half of the subarray , depending on the result of
the test. In the end, after the range has been narrowed to a single index, line
8 returns that index as the split point.
F IND -S PLIT -P OINT  ( A , p , r , x )
1 low  = p //  low end of search range
2 high  = r  + 1 //  high end of search range
3 while  low  < high //  more than one element?
4 mid  = ⌊ ( low  + high )/2 ⌋ //  midpoint of range
5 if  x  ≤ A [ mid ] //  is answer q  ≤ mid ?
6 high  = mid //  narrow search to A [ low  : mid ]
7 else  low  = mid  + 1 //  narrow search to A [ mid  + 1 : high ]
8 r eturn  low
Because F IND -S PLIT -P OINT  contains no parallelism, its span is just its
serial running time, which is also its work. On a subarray A [ p  : r ] of size n  =
r  − p  + 1, each iteration of the while  loop halves the search range, which
means that the loop terminates after Θ(lg n ) iterations. Since each iteration
takes constant time, the algorithm runs in Θ(lg n ) (worst-case) time. Thus
the procedure has work and span Θ(lg n ).
Let’ s now look at the pseudocode for the parallel mer ging procedure P-
M ERGE  on the next page. Most of the pseudocode is devoted to the recursive
procedure P-M ERGE -A UX . The procedure P-M ERGE  itself is just a “wrapper”
that sets up for P-M ERGE -A UX . It allocates a new array B [ p  : r ] to hold the
output of P-M ERGE -A UX  in line 1. It then calls P-M ERGE -A UX  in line 2,
passing the indices of the two subarrays to be mer ged and providing B  as
the output destination of the mer ged result, starting at index p . After P-
M ERGE -A UX  returns, lines 3–4 perform a parallel copy of the output B [ p  : r ]
into the subarray A [ p  : r ], which is where P-M ERGE -S OR T  expects it.
The P-M ERGE -A UX  procedure is the interesting part of the algorithm.
Let’ s start by understanding the parameters of this recursive parallel
procedure. The input array A  and the four indices p1 , r1 , p2 , r2  specify the
Page number: 917
subarrays A [ p1  : r1 ] and A [ p2  : r2 ] to be mer ged. The array B  and the index
p3  indicate that the mer ged result should be stored into B [ p3  : r3 ], where r3
= p3  + ( r1  − p1 )+ ( r2  − p2 )+ 1, as we saw earlier . The end index r3  of the
output subarray is not needed by the pseudocode, but it helps conceptually
to name the end index, as in the comment in line 13.
The procedure begins by checking the base case of the recursion and
doing some bookkeeping to simplify the rest of the pseudocode. Lines 1 and
2 test whether the two subarrays are both empty , in which case the
procedure returns. Line 3 checks whether the first subarray contains fewer
elements than the second subarray . Since the number of elements in the first
subarray is r1  − p1  + 1 and the number in the second subarray is r2  − p2  + 1,
the test omits the two “+1’ s.” If the first subarray is the smaller of the two,
lines 4 and 5 switch the roles of the subarrays so that A [ p1 , r1 ] refers to the
lar ger subarray for the balance of the procedure.
P-M ERGE  ( A , p , q , r )
  1 let B [ p  : r ] be a new array //  allocate scratch array
  2 P-M ERGE -A UX  ( A , p , q , q  + 1, r , B , p ) //  mer ge from A  into B
  3 parallel for  i  = p  to  r //  copy B  back to A  in parallel
  4 A [ i ] = B [ i ]
P-M ERGE -A UX  ( A , p 1 , r 1 , p 2 , r 2 , B , p 3 )
  1 if  p 1  > r 1  and p 2  > r 2 //  are both subarrays empty?
  2 r eturn
  3 if  r 1  − p 1  < r 2  − p 2 //  second subarray bigger?
  4 exchange p 1  with p 2 //  swap subarray roles
  5 exchange r 1  with r 2
  6 q 1  = ⌊ ( p 1  + r 1 )/2 ⌋ //  midpoint of A [ p 1  : r 1 ]
  7 x  = A [ q 1 ] //  median of A [ p 1  : r 1 ] is pivot x
  8 q 2  = F IND -S PLIT -P OINT  ( A , p 2 , r 2 , x ) //  split A [ p 2  : r 2 ] around x
  9 q 3  = p 3  + ( q 1  − p 1 ) + ( q 2  − p 2 ) //  where x  belongs in B  …
10 B [ q 3 ] = x //  … put it there
1 1 //  Recursively mer ge A [ p 1  : q 1  − 1] and A [ p 2  : q 2  − 1] into B [ p 3  : q 3  − 1].
12 spawn  P-M ERGE -A UX  ( A , p 1 , q 1  − 1, p 2 , q 2  − 1, B , p 3 )
13 //  Recursively mer ge A [ q 1  + 1 : r 1 ] and A [ q 2  : r 2 ] into B [ q 3  + 1 : r 3 ].
14 spawn  P-M ERGE -A UX  ( A , q 1  + 1, r 1 , q 2 , r 2 , B , q 3  + 1)
15 sync //  wait for spawns
Page number: 918
W e’re now at the crux of P-M ERGE -A UX : implementing the parallel
divide-and-conquer strategy . As we continue our pseudocode walk, you
may find it helpful to refer again to Figure 26.6 .
First the divide step. Line 6 computes the midpoint q1  of A [ p1  : r1 ],
which indexes a median x  = A [ q1 ] of this subarray to be used as the pivot,
and line 7 determines x  itself. Next, line 8 uses the F IND -S PLIT -P OINT
procedure to find the index q2  in A [ p2  : r2 ] such that all elements in A [ p2  :
q2  − 1] are at most x  and all the elements in A [ q2  : r2 ] are at least x . Line 9
computes the index q3  of the element that divides the output subarray B [ p3  :
r3 ] into B [ p3  : q3  − 1] and B [ q3  + 1 : r3 ], and then line 10 puts x  directly into
B [ q3 ], which is where it belongs in the output.
Next is the conquer step, which is where the parallel recursion occurs.
Lines 12 and 14 each spawn P-M ERGE -A UX  to recursively mer ge from A
into B , the first to mer ge the smaller elements and the second to mer ge the
lar ger elements. The sync  statement in line 15 ensures that the subproblems
finish before the procedure returns.
There is no combine step, as B [ p  : r ] already contains the correct sorted
output.
W ork/span analysis of parallel merging
Let’ s first analyze the worst-case span T∞ ( n ) of P-M ERGE -A UX  on input
subarrays that together contain a total of n  elements. The call to F IND -S PLIT -
P OINT  in line 8 contributes Θ(lg n ) to the span in the worst case, and the
procedure performs at most a constant amount of additional serial work
outside of the two recursive spawns in lines 12 and 14.
Because the two recursive spawns operate logically in parallel, only one
of them contributes to the overall worst-case span. W e claimed earlier that
neither recursive invocation ever operates on more than 3 n /4 elements.
Let’ s see why . Let n1  = r1  − p1  + 1 and n2  = r2  − p2  + 1, where n  = n1  + n2 ,
be the sizes of the two subarrays when line 6 starts executing, that is, after
we have established that n2  ≤ n1  by swapping the roles of the two subarrays,
if necessary . Since the pivot x  is a median of of A [ p1  : r1 ], in the worst case,
a recursive mer ge involves at most n1 /2 elements of A [ p1  : r1 ], but it might
Page number: 919
involve all n2  of the elements of A [ p2  : r2 ]. Thus we can bound the number
of elements involved in a recursive invocation of P-M ERGE -A UX  by
n 1 /2 + n 2 = (2 n 1  + 4 n 2 )/4
≤ (3 n 1  + 3 n 2 )/4 (since n 2  ≤ n 1 )
= 3 n /4,
proving the claim.
The worst-case span of P-M ERGE -A UX  can therefore be described by the
following recurrence:
Because this recurrence falls under case 2 of the master theorem with k  = 1,
its solution is T∞ ( n ) = Θ(lg 2 n ).
Now let’ s verify that the work T1 ( n ) of P-M ERGE -A UX  on n  elements is
linear . A lower bound of Ω( n ) is straightforward, since each of the n
elements is copied from array A  to array B . W e’ll show that T1 ( n ) = O ( n ) by
deriving a recurrence for the worst-case work. The binary search in line 8
costs Θ(lg n ) in the worst case, which dominates the other work outside of
the recursive spawns. For the recursive spawns, observe that although lines
12 and 14 might mer ge dif ferent numbers of elements, the two recursive
spawns together mer ge at most n  − 1 elements (since x  = A [ q ] is not
mer ged). Moreover , as we saw when analyzing the span, a recursive spawn
operates on at most 3 n /4 elements. W e therefore obtain the recurrence
where α  lies in the range 1/4 ≤ α  ≤ 3/4. The value of α  can vary from one
recursive invocation to another .
W e’ll use the substitution method (see Section 4.3 ) to prove that the
above recurrence (26.8) has solution T1 ( n ) = O ( n ). (Y ou could also use the
Akra-Bazzi method from Section 4.7 .) Assume that T1 ( n ) ≤ c1 n  − c2  lg n  for
some positive constants c1  and c2 . Using the properties of logarithms on
pages 66–67—in particular , to deduce that lg α  + lg(1 − α ) = −Θ(1)—
substitution yields
T 1 ( n ) ≤ ( c 1 αn  − c 2  lg( αn )) + ( c 1 (1 − α ) n  − c 2  lg((1 − α ) n )) + Θ(lg n )
= c 1 ( α  + (1 − α )) n  − c 2 (lg( αn ) + lg((1 − α ) n )) + Θ(lg n )
Page number: 920
= c 1 n  − c 2 (lg α  + lg n  + lg(1 − α ) + lg n ) + Θ(lg n )
= c 1 n  − c 2  lg n  − c 2 (lg n  + lg α  + lg(1 − α )) + Θ(lg n )
= c 1 n  − c 2  lg n  − c 2 (lg n  − Θ(1)) + Θ(lg n )
≤ c 1 n  − c 2  lg n ,
if we choose c2  lar ge enough that the c2 (lg n  − Θ(1)) term dominates the
Θ(lg n ) term for suf ficiently lar ge n . Furthermore, we can choose c1  lar ge
enough to satisfy the implied Θ(1) base cases of the recurrence, completing
the induction. The lower and upper bounds of Ω( n ) and O ( n ) give T1 ( n ) =
Θ( n ), asymptotically the same work as for serial mer ging.
The execution of the pseudocode in the P-M ERGE  procedure itself does
not add asymptotically to the work and span of P-M ERGE -A UX . The parallel
for  loop in lines 3–4 has Θ(lg n ) span due to the loop control, and each
iteration runs in constant time. Thus the Θ(lg2n ) span of P-M ERGE -A UX
dominates, yielding Θ(lg2n ) span overall for P-M ERGE . The parallel for
loop contains Θ( n ) work, matching the asymptotic work of P-M ERGE -A UX
and yielding Θ( n ) work overall for P-M ERGE .
Analysis of parallel merge sort
The “heavy lifting” is done. Now that we have determined the work and
span of P-M ERGE , we can analyze P-M ERGE -S OR T . Let T1 ( n ) and T∞ ( n ) be
the work and span, respectively , of P-M ERGE -S OR T  on an array of n
elements. The call to P-M ERGE  in line 10 of P-M ERGE -S OR T  dominates the
costs of lines 1–3, for both work and span. Thus we obtain the recurrence
T1 ( n ) = 2 T1 ( n /2) + Θ( n )
for the work of P-M ERGE -S OR T , and we obtain the recurrence
T∞ ( n ) = T∞ ( n /2) + Θ(lg2 n )
for its span. The work recurrence has solution T1 ( n ) = Θ( n  lg n ) by case 2 of
the master theorem with k  = 0. The span recurrence has solution T∞  ( n ) =
Θ(lg3 n ), also by case 2 of the master theorem, but with k  = 2.
Parallel mer ging gives P-M ERGE -S OR T  a parallelism advantage over P-
N AIVE -M ERGE -S OR T . The parallelism of P-N AIVE -M ERGE -S OR T , which calls
Page number: 921
the serial M ERGE  procedure, is only Θ(lg n ). For P-M ERGE -S OR T , the
parallelism is
T 1 ( n )/ T ∞ ( n ) =Θ( n  lg n )/Θ(lg3 n )
=Θ( n /lg2 n ),
which is much better , both in theory and in practice. A good
implementation in practice would sacrifice some parallelism by coarsening
the base case in order to reduce the constants hidden by the asymptotic
notation. For example, you could switch to an ef ficient serial sort, perhaps
quicksort, when the number of elements to be sorted is suf ficiently small.
Exer cises
26.3-1
Explain how to coarsen the base case of P-M ERGE .
26.3-2
Instead of finding a median element in the lar ger subarray , as P-M ERGE
does, suppose that the mer ge procedure finds a median of all the elements in
the two sorted subarrays using the result of Exercise 9.3-10. Give
pseudocode for an ef ficient parallel mer ging procedure that uses this
median-finding procedure. Analyze your algorithm.
26.3-3
Give an ef ficient parallel algorithm for partitioning an array around a pivot,
as is done by the P AR TITION  procedure on page 184. Y ou need not partition
the array in place. Make your algorithm as parallel as possible. Analyze
your algorithm. ( Hint:  Y ou might need an auxiliary array and might need to
make more than one pass over the input elements.)
26.3-4
Give a parallel version of FFT on page 890. Make your implementation as
parallel as possible. Analyze your algorithm.
★  26.3-5
Show how to parallelize S ELECT  from Section 9.3 . Make your
implementation as parallel as possible. Analyze your algorithm.
Page number: 922
Pr oblems
26-1     Implementing parallel loops using recursive spawning
Consider the parallel procedure S UM -A RRA YS  for performing pairwise
addition on n -element arrays A [1 : n ] and B [1 : n ], storing the sums in C  [1 :
n ].
S UM -A RRA YS  ( A , B , C , n )
1 parallel for  i  = 1 to  n
2 C  [ i ] = A [ i ] + B [ i ]
a.  Rewrite the parallel loop in S UM -A RRA YS  using recursive spawning in the
manner of P-M A T -V EC -R ECURSIVE . Analyze the parallelism.
Consider another implementation of the parallel loop in S UM -A RRA YS
given by the procedure S UM -A RRA YS ′, where the value grain - size  must be
specified.
S UM -A RRA YS ′( A , B , C , n )
1 grain - size  = ? //  to be determined
2 r  = ⌈ n / grain - size ⌉
3 for  k  = 0 to  r  − 1
4 spawn  A DD -S UBARRA Y  ( A , B , C , k  · grain - size  + 1,
min {( k  + 1) · grain - size , n })
5 sync
A DD -S UBARRA Y  ( A , B , C , i , j )
1 for  k  = i  to  j
2 C  [ k ] = A [ k ] + B [ k ]
b.  Suppose that you set grain - size  = 1. What is the resulting parallelism?
c.  Give a formula for the span of S UM -A RRA YS ′ in terms of n  and grain - size .
Derive the best value for grain - size  to maximize parallelism.
26-2     A voiding a temporary matrix in recursive matrix multiplication
The P-M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y -R ECURSIVE  procedure on page 772 must allocate a
temporary matrix D  of size n  × n , which can adversely af fect the constants
hidden by the Θ-notation. The procedure has high parallelism, however:
Page number: 923
Θ( n3/log2 n ). For example, ignoring the constants in the Θ-notation, the
parallelism for multiplying 1000 × 1000 matrices comes to approximately
10003/102 = 107, since lg 1000 ≈ 10. Most parallel computers have far
fewer than 10 million processors.
a.  Parallelize M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y -R ECURSIVE  without using temporary
matrices so that it retains its Θ( n3) work. ( Hint:  Spawn the recursive calls,
but insert a sync  in a judicious location to avoid races.)
b.  Give and solve recurrences for the work and span of your
implementation.
c.  Analyze the parallelism of your implementation. Ignoring the constants
in the Θ-notation, estimate the parallelism on 1000 × 1000 matrices.
Compare with the parallelism of P-M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y -R ECURSIVE , and
discuss whether the trade-of f would be worthwhile.
26-3     Parallel matrix algorithms
Before attempting this problem, it may be helpful to read Chapter 28 .
a.  Parallelize the L U -D ECOMPOSITION  procedure on page 827 by giving
pseudocode for a parallel version of this algorithm. Make your
implementation as parallel as possible, and analyze its work, span, and
parallelism.
b.  Do the same for L UP -D ECOMPOSITION  on page 830.
c.  Do the same for L UP -S OL VE  on page 824.
d.  Using equation (28.14) on page 835, write pseudocode for a parallel
algorithm to invert a symmetric positive-definite matrix. Make your
implementation as parallel as possible, and analyze its work, span, and
parallelism.
26-4     Parallel reductions and scan (prefix) computations
A ⊗ - reduction  of an array x [1 : n ], where ⊗  is an associative operator , is
the value y  = x [1] ⊗  x [2] ⊗  ⋯  ⊗  x [ n ]. The R EDUCE  procedure computes the
⊗ -reduction of a subarray x [ i  : j ] serially .
R EDUCE  ( x , i , j )
Page number: 924
1 y  = x [ i ]
2 for  k  = i  + 1 to  j
3 y  = y  ⊗  x [ k ]
4 r eturn  y
a.  Design and analyze a parallel algorithm P-R EDUCE  that uses recursive
spawning to perform the same function with Θ( n ) work and Θ(lg n ) span.
A related problem is that of computing a ⊗ -scan , sometimes called a ⊗ -
prefix computation , on an array x [1 : n ], where ⊗  is once again an
associative operator . The ⊗ -scan, implemented by the serial procedure
S CAN , produces the array y [1 : n ] given by
y [1] = x [1],
y [2] = x [1] ⊗  x [2],
y [3] = x [1] ⊗  x [2] ⊗  x [3],
⋮
y [ n ] = x [1] ⊗  x [2] ⊗  x [3] ⊗  ⋯  ⊗  x [ n ],
that is, all prefixes of the array x  “summed” using the ⊗  operator .
S CAN  ( x , n )
1 let y [1 : n ] be a new array
2 y [1] = x [1]
3 for  i  = 2 to  n
4 y [ i ] = y [ i  − 1] ⊗  1 ⊗  x [ i ]
5 r eturn  y
Parallelizing S CAN  is not straightforward. For example, simply changing
the for  loop to a parallel for  loop would create races, since each iteration
of the loop body depends on the previous iteration. The procedures P-S CAN -
1 and P-S CAN -1-A UX  perform the ⊗ -scan in parallel, albeit inef ficiently .
P-S CAN -1( x , n )
1 let y [1] : n  be a new array
2 P-S CAN -1-A UX  ( x , y , 1, n )
3 r eturn  y
P-S CAN -1-A UX  ( x , y , i , j )
1 parallel for  l  = i  to  j
2 y [ l ] = P-R EDUCE  ( x , 1, l )
Page number: 925
b.  Analyze the work, span, and parallelism of P-S CAN -1.
The procedures P-S CAN -2 and P-S CAN -2-A UX  use recursive spawning to
perform a more ef ficient ⊗ -scan.
P-S CAN -2( x , n )
1 let y [1] : n  be a new array
2 P-S CAN -2-A UX  ( x , y , 1, n )
3 r eturn  y
P-S CAN -2-A UX  ( x , y , i , j )
1 if  i  == j
2 y [ i ] = x [ i ]
3 else  k  = ⌊ ( i  + j )/2 ⌋
4 spawn  P-S CAN -2-A UX  ( x , y , i , k )
5 P-S CAN -2-A UX  ( x , y , k  + 1, j )
6 sync
7 parallel for  l  = k  + 1 to  j
8 y [ l ] = y [ k ] ⊗  y [ l ]
c.  Ar gue that P-S CAN -2 is correct, and analyze its work, span, and
parallelism.
T o improve on both P-S CAN -1 and P-S CAN -2, perform the ⊗ -scan in two
distinct passes over the data. The first pass gathers the terms for various
contiguous subarrays of x  into a temporary array t , and the second pass uses
the terms in t  to compute the final result y . The pseudocode in the
procedures P-S CAN -3, P-S CAN -U P , and P-S CAN -D OWN  on the facing page
implements this strategy , but certain expressions have been omitted.
d.  Fill in the three missing expressions in line 8 of P-S CAN -U P  and lines 5
and 6 of P-S CAN -D OWN . Ar gue that with the expressions you supplied, P-
S CAN -3 is correct. ( Hint:  Prove that the value v  passed to P-S CAN -D OWN
( v , x , t , y , i , j ) satisfies v  = x [1] ⊗  x [2] ⊗  ⋯  ⊗  x [ i  − 1].)
e.  Analyze the work, span, and parallelism of P-S CAN -3.
f.  Describe how to rewrite P-S CAN -3 so that it doesn’ t require the use of the
temporary array t .
★  g.  Give an algorithm P-S CAN -4( x , n ) for a scan that operates in place. It
should place its output in x  and require only constant auxiliary storage.
Page number: 926
h.  Describe an ef ficient parallel algorithm that uses a +-scan to determine
whether a string of parentheses is well formed. For example, the string ( (
) ( ) ) ( ) is well formed, but the string ( ( ) ) ) ( ( ) is not. ( Hint:  Interpret (
as a 1 and ) as a −1, and then perform a +-scan.)
P-S CAN -3( x , n )
1 let y [1] : n  and t [1 : n ] be new arrays
2 y [1] = x [1]
3 if  n  > 1
4 P-S CAN -U P  ( x , t , 2, n )
5 P-S CAN -D OWN  ( x [1], x , t , y , 2, n )
6 r eturn  y
P-S CAN -U P  ( x , t , i , j )
1 if  i  == j
2 r eturn  x [ i ]
3 else
4 k  = ⌊ ( i  + j )/2 ⌋
5 t [ k ] = spawn  P-S CAN -U P  ( x , t , i , k )
6 right  = P-S CAN -U P  ( x , t , k  + 1, j )
7 sync
8 r eturn  ____ //  fill in the blank
P-S CAN -D OWN  ( v , x , t , y , i , j )
1 if  i  == j
2 y [ i ] = v  ⊗  x [ i ]
3 else
4 k  = ⌊ ( i  + j )/2 ⌋
5 spawn  P-S CAN -D OWN  (____, x , t , y , i , k ) //  fill in the blank
6 P-S CAN -D OWN  (____, x , t , y , k  + 1, j ) //  fill in the blank
7 sync
26-5     Parallelizing a simple stencil calculation
Computational science is replete with algorithms that require the entries of
an array to be filled in with values that depend on the values of certain
already computed neighboring entries, along with other information that
does not change over the course of the computation. The pattern of
neighboring entries does not change during the computation and is called a
stencil . For example, Section 14.4  presents a stencil algorithm to compute a
longest common subsequence, where the value in entry c [ i , j ] depends only
on the values in c [ i  − 1, j ], c [ i , j  − 1], and c [ i  − 1, j  − 1], as well as the
elements xi  and yj  within the two sequences given as inputs. The input
Page number: 927
sequences are fixed, but the algorithm fills in the two-dimensional array c
so that it computes entry c [ i , j ] after computing all three entries c [ i  − 1, j ],
c [ i , j  − 1], and c [ i  − 1, j  − 1].
This problem examines how to use recursive spawning to parallelize a
simple stencil calculation on an n  × n  array A  in which the value placed into
entry A [ i , j ] depends only on values in A [ i ′, j ′], where i ′ ≤ i  and j ′ ≤ j  (and of
course, i ′ ≠ i  or j ′ ≠ j ). In other words, the value in an entry depends only on
values in entries that are above it and/or to its left, along with static
information outside of the array . Furthermore, we assume throughout this
problem that once the entries upon which A [ i , j ] depends have been filled
in, the entry A [ i , j ] can be computed in Θ(1) time (as in the L CS -L ENGTH
procedure of Section 14.4 ).
Partition the n  × n  array A  into four n /2 × n /2 subarrays as follows:
Y ou can immediately fill in subarray A1 1  recursively , since it does not
depend on the entries in the other three subarrays. Once the computation of
A1 1  finishes, you can fill in A12  and A21  recursively in parallel, because
although they both depend on A1 1 , they do not depend on each other .
Finally , you can fill in A22  recursively .
a.  Give parallel pseudocode that performs this simple stencil calculation
using a divide-and-conquer algorithm S IMPLE -S TENCIL  based on the
decomposition (26.9) and the discussion above. (Don’ t worry about the
details of the base case, which depends on the specific stencil.) Give and
solve recurrences for the work and span of this algorithm in terms of n .
What is the parallelism?
b.  Modify your solution to part (a) to divide an n  × n  array into nine n /3 ×
n /3 subarrays, again recursing with as much parallelism as possible.
Analyze this algorithm. How much more or less parallelism does this
algorithm have compared with the algorithm from part (a)?
c.  Generalize your solutions to parts (a) and (b) as follows. Choose an
integer b  ≥ 2. Divide an n  × n  array into b2 subarrays, each of size n / b  ×
n / b , recursing with as much parallelism as possible. In terms of n  and b ,
what are the work, span, and parallelism of your algorithm? Ar gue that,
Page number: 928
using this approach, the parallelism must be o ( n ) for any choice of b  ≥ 2.
( Hint:  For this ar gument, show that the exponent of n  in the parallelism is
strictly less than 1 for any choice of b  ≥ 2.)
d.  Give pseudocode for a parallel algorithm for this simple stencil
calculation that achieves Θ( n /lg n ) parallelism. Ar gue using notions of
work and span that the problem has Θ( n ) inherent parallelism.
Unfortunately , simple fork-join parallelism does not let you achieve this
maximal parallelism.
26-6     Randomized parallel algorithms
Like serial algorithms, parallel algorithms can employ random-number
generators. This problem explores how to adapt the measures of work, span,
and parallelism to handle the expected behavior of randomized task-parallel
algorithms. It also asks you to design and analyze a parallel algorithm for
randomized quicksort.
a.  Explain how to modify the work law (26.2), span law (26.3), and greedy
scheduler bound (26.4) to work with expectations when TP , T1 , and T∞ are
all random variables.
b.  Consider a randomized parallel algorithm for which 1% of the time, T1  =
104 and T10,000  = 1, but for the remaining 99% of the time, T1  = T10,000  =
109. Ar gue that the speedup  of a randomized parallel algorithm should be
defined as E [ T1 ]/ E [ TP ], rather than E [ T1 / TP ].
c.  Ar gue that the parallelism  of a randomized task-parallel algorithm should
be defined as the ratio E [ T1 ]/ E [ T∞ ].
d.  Parallelize the R ANDOMIZED -Q UICKSOR T  algorithm on page 192 by using
recursive spawning to produce P-R ANDOMIZED -Q UICKSOR T . (Do not
parallelize R ANDOMIZED -P AR TITION .)
e.  Analyze your parallel algorithm for randomized quicksort. ( Hint:  Review
the analysis of R ANDOMIZED -S ELECT  on page 230.)
f.  Parallelize R ANDOMIZED -S ELECT  on page 230. Make your implementation
as parallel as possible. Analyze your algorithm. ( Hint:  Use the
partitioning algorithm from Exercise 26.3-3.)
Page number: 929
Chapter notes
Parallel computers and algorithmic models for parallel programming have
been around in various forms for years. Prior editions of this book included
material on sorting networks and the PRAM (Parallel Random-Access
Machine) model. The data-parallel model [ 58 , 217 ] is another popular
algorithmic programming model, which features operations on vectors and
matrices as primitives. The notion of sequential consistency is due to
Lamport [ 275 ].
Graham [ 197 ] and Brent [ 71 ] showed that there exist schedulers
achieving the bound of Theorem 26.1. Eager , Zahorjan, and Lazowska
[ 129 ] showed that any greedy scheduler achieves this bound and proposed
the methodology of using work and span (although not by those names) to
analyze parallel algorithms. Blelloch [ 57 ] developed an algorithmic
programming model based on work and span (which he called “depth”) for
data-parallel programming. Blumofe and Leiserson [ 63 ] gave a distributed
scheduling algorithm for task-parallel computations based on randomized
“work-stealing” and showed that it achieves the bound E [ TP ] ≤ T1 / P  +
O ( T∞ ). Arora, Blumofe, and Plaxton [ 20 ] and Blelloch, Gibbons, and
Matias [ 61 ] also provided provably good algorithms for scheduling task-
parallel computations. The recent literature contains many algorithms and
strategies for scheduling parallel programs.
The parallel pseudocode and programming model were influenced by
Cilk [ 290 , 291 , 383 , 396 ]. The open-source project OpenCilk
( www .opencilk.or g ) provides Cilk programming as an extension to the C
and C++ programming languages. All of the parallel algorithms in this
chapter can be coded straightforwardly in Cilk.
Concerns about nondeterministic parallel programs were expressed by
Lee [ 281 ] and Bocchino, Adve, Adve, and Snir [ 64 ]. The algorithms
literature contains many algorithmic strategies (see, for example, [ 60 , 85 ,
1 18 , 140 , 160 , 282 , 283 , 412 , 461 ]) for detecting races and extending the
fork-join model to avoid or safely embrace various kinds of
nondeterminism. Blelloch, Fineman, Gibbons, and Shun [ 59 ] showed that
deterministic parallel algorithms can often be as fast as, or even faster than,
their nondeterministic counterparts.
Several of the parallel algorithms in this chapter appeared in
unpublished lecture notes by C. E. Leiserson and H. Prokop and were
Page number: 930
originally implemented in Cilk. The parallel mer ge-sorting algorithm was
inspired by an algorithm due to Akl [ 12 ].
1 In mathematics, a projection is an idempotent function, that is, a function f  such that f  ○  f  = f . In this
case, the function f  maps the set P  of fork-join programs to the set P S  ⊂  P  of serial programs,
which are themselves fork-join programs with no parallelism. For a fork-join program x  ∈  P , since
we have f  ( f  ( x )) = f  ( x ), the serial projection, as we have defined it, is indeed a mathematical
projection.
2 Also called a computation dag  in the literature.
Page number: 931
27        Online Algorithms
Most problems described in this book have assumed that the entire input
was available before the algorithm executes. In many situations, however ,
the input becomes available not in advance, but only as the algorithm
executes. This idea was implicit in much of the discussion of data structures
in Part III . The reason that you want to design, for example, a data structure
that can handle n  I NSER T , D ELETE , and S EARCH  operations in O (lg n ) time
per operation is most likely because you are going to receive n  such
operation requests without knowing in advance what operations will be
coming. This idea was also implicit in amortized analysis in Chapter 16 ,
where we saw how to maintain a table that can grow or shrink in response
to a sequence of insertion and deletion operations, yet with a constant
amortized cost per operation.
An online algorithm  receives its input progressively over time, rather
than having the entire input available at the start, as in an of fline algorithm .
Online algorithms pertain to many situations in which information arrives
gradually . A stock trader must make decisions today , without knowing what
the prices will be tomorrow , yet wants to achieve good returns. A computer
system must schedule arriving jobs without knowing what work will need
to be done in the future. A store must decide when to order more inventory
without knowing what the future demand will be. A driver for a ride-hailing
service must decide whether to pick up a fare without knowing who will
request rides in the future. In each of these situations, and many more,
algorithmic decisions must be made without knowledge of the future.
There are several approaches for dealing with unknown future inputs.
One approach is to form a probabilistic model of future inputs and design
an algorithm that assumes future inputs conform to the model. This
Page number: 932
technique is common, for example, in the field of queuing theory , and it is
also related to machine learning. Of course, you might not be able to
develop a workable probabilistic model, or even if you can, some inputs
might not conform to it. This chapter takes a dif ferent approach. Instead of
assuming anything about the future input, we employ a conservative
strategy of limiting how poor a solution any input can entail.
This chapter , therefore, adopts a worst-case approach, designing online
algorithms that guarantee the quality of the solution for all possible future
inputs. W e’ll analyze online algorithms by comparing the solution produced
by the online algorithm with a solution produced by an optimal algorithm
that knows the future inputs, and taking a worst-case ratio over all possible
instances. W e call this methodology competitive analysis . W e’ll use a
similar approach when we study approximation algorithms in Chapter 35 ,
where we’ll compare the solution returned by an algorithm that might be
suboptimal with the value of the optimal solution, and determine a worst-
case ratio over all possible instances.
W e start with a “toy” problem: deciding between whether to take the
elevator or the stairs. This problem will introduce the basic methodology of
thinking about online algorithms and how to analyze them via competitive
analysis. W e will then look at two problems that use competitive analysis.
The first is how to maintain a search list so that the access time is not too
lar ge, and the second is about strategies for deciding which cache blocks to
evict from a cache or other kind of fast computer memory .
27.1    W aiting for an elevator
Our first example of an online algorithm models a problem that you likely
have encountered yourself: whether you should wait for an elevator to
arrive or just take the stairs. Suppose that you enter a building and wish to
visit an of fice that is k  floors up. Y ou have two choices: walk up the stairs
or take the elevator . Let’ s assume, for convenience, that you can climb the
stairs at the rate of one floor per minute. The elevator travels much faster
than you can climb the stairs: it can ascend all k  floors in just one minute.
Y our dilemma is that you do not know how long it will take for the elevator
to arrive at the ground floor and pick you up. Should you take the elevator
or the stairs? How do you decide?
Page number: 933
Let’ s analyze the problem. T aking the stairs takes k  minutes, no matter
what. Suppose you know that the elevator takes at most B  − 1 minutes to
arrive for some value of B  that is considerably higher than k . (The elevator
could be going up when you call for it and then stop at several floors on its
way down.) T o keep things simple, let’ s also assume that the number of
minutes for the elevator to arrive is an integer . Therefore, waiting for the
elevator and taking it k  floors up takes anywhere from one minute (if the
elevator is already at the ground floor) to ( B  − 1) + 1 = B  minutes (the worst
case). Although you know B  and k , you don’ t know how long the elevator
will take to arrive this time. Y ou can use competitive analysis to inform
your decision regarding whether to take the stairs or elevator . In the spirit of
competitive analysis, you want to be sure that, no matter what the future
brings (i.e., how long the elevator takes to arrive), you will not wait much
longer than a seer who knows when the elevator will arrive.
Let us first consider what the seer would do. If the seer knows that the
elevator is going to arrive in at most k  − 1 minutes, the seer waits for the
elevator , and otherwise, the seer takes the stairs. Letting m  denote the
number of minutes it takes for the elevator to arrive at the ground floor , we
can express the time that the seer spends as the function
W e typically evaluate online algorithms by their competitive ratio . Let U
denote the set (universe) of all possible inputs, and consider some input I  ∈
U . For a minimization problem, such as the stairs-versus-elevator problem,
if an online algorithm A  produces a solution with value A ( I ) on input I  and
the solution from an algorithm F  that knows the future has value F ( I ) on the
same input, then the competitive ratio of algorithm A  is
max { A ( I )/ F ( I ) : I  ∈  U }.
If an online algorithm has a competitive ratio of c , we say that it is c-
competitive . The competitive ratio is always at least 1, so that we want an
online algorithm with a competitive ratio as close to 1 as possible.
In the stairs-versus-elevator problem, the only input is the time for the
elevator to arrive. Algorithm F  knows this information, but an online
algorithm has to make a decision without knowing when the elevator will
Page number: 934
arrive. Consider the algorithm “always take the stairs,” which always takes
exactly k  minutes. Using equation (27.1), the competitive ratio is
Enumerating the terms in equation (27.2) gives the competitive ratio as
so that the competitive ratio is k . The maximum is achieved when the
elevator arrives immediately . In this case, taking the stairs requires k
minutes, but the optimal solution takes just 1 minute.
Now let’ s consider the opposite approach: “always take the elevator .” If
it takes m  minutes for the elevator to arrive at the ground floor , then this
algorithm will always take m  + 1 minutes. Thus the competitive ratio
becomes
max {( m  + 1)/ t ( m ) : 0 ≤ m  ≤ B  − 1},
which we can again enumerate as
Now the maximum is achieved when the elevator takes B  − 1 minutes to
arrive, compared with the optimal approach of taking the stairs, which
requires k  minutes.
Hence, the algorithm “always take the stairs” has competitive ratio k ,
and the algorithm “always take the elevator” has competitive ratio B / k .
Because we prefer the algorithm with smaller competitive ratio, if k  = 10
and B  = 300, we prefer “always take the stairs,” with competitive ratio 10,
over “always take the elevator ,” with competitive ratio 30. T aking the stairs
is not always better , or necessarily more often better . It’ s just that taking the
stairs guards better against the worst-case future.
These two approaches of always taking the stairs and always taking the
elevator are extreme solutions, however . Instead, you can “hedge your bets”
and guard even better against a worst-case future. In particular , you can
wait for the elevator for a while, and then if it doesn’ t arrive, take the stairs.
How long is “a while”? Let’ s say that “a while” is k  minutes. Then the time
h ( m ) required by this hedging strategy , as a function of the number m  of
minutes before the elevator arrives, is
Page number: 935
In the second case, h ( m ) = 2 k  because you wait for k  minutes and then
climb the stairs for k  minutes. The competitive ratio is now
max { h ( m )/ t ( m ) : 0 ≤ m  ≤ B  − 1}.
Enumerating this ratio yields
The competitive ratio is now independent  of k  and B .
This example illustrates a common philosophy in online algorithms: we
want an algorithm that guards against any possible worst case. Initially ,
waiting for the elevator guards against the case when the elevator arrives
quickly , but eventually switching to the stairs guards against the case when
the elevator takes a long time to arrive.
Exer cises
27.1-1
Suppose that when hedging your bets, you wait for p  minutes, instead of for
k  minutes, before taking the stairs. What is the competitive ratio as a
function of p  and k ? How should you choose p  to minimize the competitive
ratio?
27.1-2
Imagine that you decide to take up downhill skiing. Suppose that a pair of
skis costs r  dollars to rent for a day and b  dollars to buy , where b  > r . If you
knew in advance how many days you would ever ski, your decision whether
to rent or buy would be easy . If you’ll ski for at least ⌈ b / r ⌉  days, then you
should buy skis, and otherwise you should rent. This strategy minimizes the
total that you ever spend. In reality , you don’ t know in advance how many
days you’ll eventually ski. Even after you have skied several times, you still
don’ t know how many more times you’ll ever ski. Y et you don’ t want to
waste your money . Give and analyze an algorithm that has a competitive
ratio of 2, that is, an algorithm guaranteeing that, no matter how many times
you ski, you never spend more than twice what you would have spent if you
knew from the outset how many times you’ll ski.
Page number: 936
27.1-3
In “concentration solitaire,” a game for one person, you have n  pairs of
matching cards. The backs of the cards are all the same, but the fronts
contain pictures of animals. One pair has pictures of aardvarks, one pair has
pictures of bears, one pair has pictures of camels, and so on. At the start of
the game, the cards are all placed face down. In each round, you can turn
two cards face up to reveal their pictures. If the pictures match, then you
remove that pair from the game. If they don’ t match, then you turn both of
them over , hiding their pictures once again. The game ends when you have
removed all n  pairs, and your score is how many rounds you needed to do
so. Suppose that you can remember the picture on every card that you have
seen. Give an algorithm to play concentration solitaire that has a
competitive ratio of 2.
27.2    Maintaining a sear ch list
The next example of an online algorithm pertains to maintaining the order
of elements in a linked list, as in Section 10.2 . This problem often arises in
practice for hash tables when collisions are resolved by chaining (see
Section 1 1.2 ), since each slot contains a linked list. Reordering the linked
list of elements in each slot of the hash table can boost the performance of
searches measurably .
The list-maintenance problem can be set up as follows. Y ou are given a
list L  of n  elements { x1 , x2 , … , xn }. W e’ll assume that the list is doubly
linked, although the algorithms and analysis work just as well for singly
linked lists. Denote the position of element xi  in the list L  by rL ( xi ), where 1
≤ rL ( xi ) ≤ n . Calling L IST -S EARCH ( L , xi ) on page 260 thus takes Θ( rL ( xi ))
time.
If you know in advance something about the distribution of search
requests, then it makes sense to arrange the list ahead of time to put the
more frequently searched elements closer to the front, which minimizes the
total cost (see Exercise 27.2-1). If instead you don’ t know anything about
the search sequence, then no matter how you arrange the list, it is possible
that every search is for whatever element appears at the tail of the list. The
total searching time would then be Θ( nm ), where m  is the number of
searches.
Page number: 937
If you notice patterns in the access sequence or you observe dif ferences
in the frequencies in which elements are accessed, then you might want to
rearrange the list as you perform searches. For example, if you discover that
every search is for a particular element, you could move that element to the
front of the list. In general, you could rearrange the list after each call to
L IST -S EARCH . But how would you do so without knowing the future? After
all, no matter how you move elements around, every search could be for the
last element.
But it turns out that some search sequences are “easier” than others.
Rather than just evaluate performance on the worst-case sequence, let’ s
compare a reor ganization scheme with whatever an optimal of fline
algorithm would do if it knew the search sequence in advance. That way , if
the sequence is fundamentally hard, the optimal of fline algorithm will also
find it hard, but if the sequence is easy , we can hope to do reasonably well.
T o ease analysis, we’ll drop the asymptotic notation and say that the cost
is just i  to search for the i th element in the list. Let’ s also assume that the
only way to reorder the elements in the list is by swapping two adjacent
elements in the list. Because the list is doubly linked, each swap incurs a
cost of 1. Thus, for example, a search for the sixth element followed by
moving it forward two places (entailing two swaps) incurs a total cost 8.
The goal is to minimize the total cost of calls to L IST -S EARCH  plus the total
number of swaps performed.
The online algorithm that we’ll explore is M OVE -T O -F RONT ( L , x ). This
procedure first searches for x  in the doubly linked list L , and then it moves x
to the front of the list.1 If x  is located at position r  = rL ( x ) before the call,
M OVE -T O -F RONT  swaps x  with the element in position r  − 1, then with the
element in position r  − 2, and so on, until it finally swaps x  with the element
in position 1. Thus if the call M OVE -T O -F RONT ( L , 8) executes on the list L  =
〈 5, 3, 12, 4, 8, 9, 22 〉 , the list becomes 〈 8, 5, 3, 12, 4, 9, 22 〉 . The call M OVE -
T O -F RONT ( L , k ) costs 2 rL ( k ) − 1: it costs rL ( k ) to search for k , and it costs 1
for each of the rL ( k ) − 1 swaps that move k  to the front of the list.
Page number: 938
Figur e 27.1  The costs incurred by the procedures F ORESEE  and M OVE -T O -F RONT  when
searching for the elements 5, 3, 4, and 4, starting with the list L  = 〈 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 〉 . If F ORESEE  instead
moved 3 to the front after the search for 5, the cumulative cost would not change, nor would the
cumulative cost change if 4 moved to the second position after the search for 5.
W e’ll see that M OVE -T O -F RONT  has a competitive ratio of 4. Let’ s think
about what this means. M OVE -T O -F RONT  performs a series of operations on
a doubly linked list, accumulating cost. For comparison, suppose that there
is an algorithm F ORESEE  that knows the future. Like M OVE -T O -F RONT , it
also searches the list and moves elements around, but after each call it
optimally rearranges the list for the future. (There may be more than one
optimal order .) Thus F ORESEE  and M OVE -T O -F RONT  maintain dif ferent lists
of the same elements.
Consider the example shown in Figure 27.1 . Starting with the list 〈 1, 2,
3, 4, 5 〉 , four searches occur , for the elements 5, 3, 4, and 4. The
hypothetical procedure F ORESEE , after searching for 3, moves 4 to the front
of the list, knowing that a search for 4 is imminent. It thus incurs a swap
cost of 3 upon its second call, after which no further swap costs accrue.
M OVE -T O -F RONT  incurs swap costs in each step, moving the found element
to the front. In this example, M OVE -T O -F RONT  has a higher cost in each
step, but that is not necessarily always the case.
The key to proving the competitive bound is to show that at any point,
the total cost of M OVE -T O -F RONT  is not much higher than that of F ORESEE .
Surprisingly , we can determine a bound on the costs incurred by M OVE -T O -
F RONT  relative to F ORESEE  even though M OVE -T O -F RONT  cannot see the
future.
If we compare any particular step, M OVE -T O -F RONT  and F ORESEE  may
be operating on very dif ferent lists and do very dif ferent things. If we focus
on the search for 4 above, we observe that F ORESEE  actually moves it to the
front of the list early , paying to move the element to the front before it is
accessed. T o capture this concept, we use the idea of an inversion : a pair of
Page number: 939
elements, say a  and b , in which a  appears before b  in one list, but b  appears
before a  in another list. For two lists L  and L ′, let I ( L , L ′), called the
inversion count , denote the number of inversions between the two lists, that
is, the number of pairs of elements whose order dif fers in the two lists. For
example, with lists L  = 〈 5,3,1,4,2 〉  and L ′ = 〈 3,1,2,4,5 〉 , then out of the 
 pairs, exactly five of them—(1, 5), (2, 4), (2, 5), (3, 5), (4, 5)—are
inversions, since these pairs, and only these pairs, appear in dif ferent orders
in the two lists. Thus the inversion count is I ( L , L ′) = 5.
In order to analyze the algorithm, we define the following notation. Let 
 be the list maintained by M OVE -T O -F RONT  immediately after the i th
search, and similarly , let 
  be F ORESEE ’ s list immediately after the i th
search. Let 
  and 
  be the costs incurred by M OVE -T O -F RONT  and F ORESEE
on their i th calls, respectively . W e don’ t know how many swaps F ORESEE
performs in its i th call, but we’ll denote that number by ti . Therefore, if the
i th operation is a search for element x , then
In order to compare these costs more carefully , let’ s break down the
elements into subsets, depending on their positions in the two lists before
the i th search, relative to the element x  being searched for in the i th search.
W e define three sets:
BB  = {elements before x  in both 
  and 
 },
BA  = {elements before x  in 
  but after x  in 
 },
AB  = {elements after x  in 
  but before x  in 
 }.
W e can now relate the position of element x  in 
  and 
  to the sizes of
these sets:
When a swap occurs in one of the lists, it changes the relative positions
of the two elements involved, which in turn changes the inversion count.
Suppose that elements x  and y  are swapped in some list. Then the only
possible dif ference in the inversion count between this list and any  other list
depends on whether ( x , y ) is an inversion. In fact, the inversion count of ( x ,
Page number: 940
y ) with respect to any other list must  change. If ( x , y ) is an inversion before
the swap, it no longer is afterward, and vice versa. Therefore, if two
consecutive elements x  and y  swap positions in a list L , then for any other
list L ′, the value of the inversion count I ( L , L ′) either increases by 1 or
decreases by 1.
As we compare M OVE -T O -F RONT  and F ORESEE  searching and modifying
their lists, we’ll think about M OVE -T O -F RONT  executing on its list for the i th
time and then F ORESEE  executing on its list for the i th time. After M OVE -T O -
F RONT  has executed for the i th time and before F ORESEE  has executed for
the i th time, we’ll compare 
  (the inversion count immediately
before the i th call of M OVE -T O -F RONT ) with 
  (the inversion count
after the i th call of M OVE -T O -F RONT  but before the i th call of F ORESEE ).
W e’ll concern ourselves later with what F ORESEE  does.
Let us analyze what happens to the inversion count after executing the
i th call of M OVE -T O -F RONT , and suppose that it searches for element x .
More precisely , we’ll compute 
 , the change in the
inversion count, which gives a rough idea of how much M OVE -T O -F RONT ’ s
list becomes more or less like F ORESEE ’ s list. After searching, M OVE -T O -
F RONT  performs a series of swaps with each of the elements on the list 
that precedes x . Using the notation above, the number of such swaps is | BB |
+ | BA |. Bearing in mind that the list 
  has yet to be changed by the i th call
of F ORESEE , let’ s see how the inversion count changes.
Consider a swap with an element y  ∈  BB . Before the swap, y  precedes x
in both 
  and 
 . After the swap, x  precedes y  in 
 , and 
  does not
change. Therefore, the inversion count increases by 1 for each element in
BB . Now consider a swap with an element z  ∈  BA . Before the swap, z
precedes x  in 
  but x  precedes z  in 
 . After the swap, x  precedes z  in
both lists. Therefore, the inversion count decreases by 1 for each element in
BA . Thus altogether , the inversion count increases by
W e have laid the groundwork needed to analyze M OVE -T O -F RONT .
Theorem 27.1
Algorithm M OVE -T O -F RONT  has a competitive ratio of 4.
Page number: 941
Proof    The proof uses a potential function, as described in Chapter 16  on
amortized analysis. The value Φi  of the potential function after the i th calls
of M OVE -T O -F RONT  and F ORESEE  depends on the inversion count:
(Intuitively , the factor of 2 embodies the notion that each inversion
represents a cost of 2 for M OVE -T O -F RONT  relative to F ORESEE : 1 for
searching and 1 for swapping.) By equation (27.7), after the i th call of
M OVE -T O -F RONT , but before the i th call of F ORESEE , the potential increases
by 2(| BB | − | BA |). Since the inversion count of the two lists is nonnegative,
we have Φi  ≥ 0 for all i  ≥ 0. Assuming that M OVE -T O -F RONT  and F ORESEE
start with the same list, the initial potential Φ0  is 0, so that Φi  ≥ Φ0  for all i .
Drawing from equation (16.2) on page 456, the amortized cost 
  of the
i th M OVE -T O -F RONT  operation is
where 
 , the actual cost of the i th M OVE -T O -F RONT  operation, is given by
equation (27.3):
Now , let’ s consider the potential change Φi  − Φi −1 . Since both LM and LF
change, let’ s consider the changes to one list at a time. Recall that when
M OVE -T O -F RONT  moves element x  to the front, it increases the potential by
exactly 2(| BB | − | BA |). W e now consider how the optimal algorithm
F ORESEE  changes its list LF: it performs ti  swaps. Each swap performed by
F ORESEE  either increases or decreases the potential by 2, and thus the
increase in potential by F ORESEE  in the i th call can be at most 2 ti . W e
therefore have
Page number: 942
W e now finish the proof as in Chapter 16  by showing that the total
amortized cost provides an upper bound on the total actual cost, because the
initial potential function is 0 and the potential function is always
nonnegative. By equation (16.3) on page 456, for any sequence of m  M OVE -
T O -F RONT  operations, we have
Therefore, we have
Thus the total cost of the m  M OVE -T O -F RONT  operations is at most 4 times
the total cost of the m  F ORESEE  operations, so M OVE -T O -F RONT  is 4-
competitive.
▪
Isn’ t it amazing that we can compare M OVE -T O -F RONT  with the optimal
algorithm F ORESEE  when we have no idea of the swaps that F ORESEE
makes? W e were able to relate the performance of M OVE -T O -F RONT  to the
optimal algorithm by capturing how particular properties (swaps in this
case) must evolve relative to the optimal algorithm, without actually
knowing the optimal algorithm.
Page number: 943
The online algorithm M OVE -T O -F RONT  has a competitive ratio of 4: on
any input sequence, it incurs a cost at most 4 times that of any other
algorithm. On a particular input sequence, it could cost much less than 4
times the optimal algorithm, perhaps even matching the optimal algorithm.
Exer cises
27.2-1
Y ou are given a set S  = { x1 , x2 , … , xn } of n  elements, and you wish to make
a static list L  (no rearranging once the list is created) containing the
elements of S  that is good for searching. Suppose that you have a
probability distribution, where p ( xi ) is the probability that a given search
searches for element xi . Ar gue that the expected cost for m  searches is
Prove that this sum is minimized when the elements of L  are sorted in
decreasing order with respect to p ( xi ).
27.2-2
Professor Carnac claims that since F ORESEE  is an optimal algorithm that
knows the future, then at each step it must incur no more cost than M OVE -
T O -F RONT . Either prove that Professor Carnac is correct or provide a
counterexample.
27.2-3
Another way to maintain a linked list for ef ficient searching is for each
element to maintain a frequency count : the number of times that the
element has been searched for . The idea is to rearrange list elements after
searches so that the list is always sorted by decreasing frequency count,
from lar gest to smallest. Either show that this algorithm is O (1)-
competitive, or prove that it is not.
27.2-4
The model in this section char ged a cost of 1 for each swap. W e can
consider an alternative cost model in which, after accessing x , you can
move x  anywhere earlier in the list, and there is no cost for doing so. The
only cost is the cost of the actual accesses. Show that M OVE -T O -F RONT  is 2-
Page number: 944
competitive in this cost model, assuming that the number requests is
suf ficiently lar ge. ( Hint:  Use the potential function 
 .)
27.3    Online caching
In Section 15.4 , we studied the caching problem, in which blocks  of data
from the main memory of a computer are stored in the cache : a small but
faster memory . In that section, we studied the of fline version of the
problem, in which we assumed that we knew the sequence of memory
requests in advance, and we designed an algorithm to minimize the number
of cache misses. In almost all computer systems, caching is, in fact, an
online problem. W e do not generally know the series of cache requests in
advance; they are presented to the algorithm only as the requests for blocks
are actually made. T o gain a better understanding of this more realistic
scenario, we analyze online algorithms for caching. W e will first see that all
deterministic online algorithms for caching have a lower bound of Ω( k ) for
the competitive ratio, where k  is the size of the cache. W e will then present
an algorithm with a competitive ratio of Θ( n ), where the input size is n , and
one with a competitive ratio of O ( k ), which matches the lower bound. W e
will end by showing how to use randomization to design an algorithm with
a much better competitive ratio of Θ(lg k ). W e will also discuss the
assumptions that underlie randomized online algorithms, via the notion of
an adversary , such as we saw in Chapter 1 1  and will see in Chapter 31 .
Y ou can find the terminology used to describe the caching problem in
Section 15.4 , which you might wish to review before proceeding.
27.3.1    Deterministic caching algorithms
In the caching problem, the input comprises a sequence of n  memory
requests, for data in blocks b1 , b2 , … , bn , in that order . The blocks
requested are not necessarily distinct: each block may appear multiple times
within the request sequence. After block bi  is requested, it resides in a cache
that can hold up to k  blocks, where k  is a fixed cache size. W e assume that n
> k , since otherwise we are assured that the cache can hold all the requested
blocks at once. When a block bi  is requested, if it is already in the cache,
then a cache hit  occurs and the cache remains unchanged. If bi  is not in the
cache, then a cache miss  occurs. If the cache contains fewer than k  blocks
Page number: 945
upon a cache miss, block bi  is placed into the cache, which now contains
one block more than before. If a cache miss occurs with an already full
cache, however , some block must be evicted from the cache before bi  can
enter . Thus, a caching algorithm must decide which block to evict from the
cache upon a cache miss when the cache is full. The goal is to minimize the
number of cache misses over the entire request sequence. The caching
algorithms considered in this chapter dif fer only in which block they decide
to evict upon a cache miss. W e do not consider abilities such as prefetching,
in which a block is brought into the cache before an upcoming request in
order to avert a future cache miss.
There are many online caching policies to determine which block to
evict, including the following:
First-in, first-out (FIFO): evict the block that has been in the cache
the longest time.
Last-in, first-out (LIFO): evict the block that has been in the cache
the shortest time.
Least Recently Used (LRU): evict the block whose last use is furthest
in the past.
Least Frequently Used (LFU): evict the block that has been accessed
the fewest times, breaking ties by choosing the block that has been in
the cache the longest.
T o analyze these algorithms, we assume that the cache starts out empty ,
so that no evictions occur during the first k  requests. W e wish to compare
the performance of an online algorithm to an optimal of fline algorithm that
knows the future requests. As we will soon see, all these deterministic
online algorithms have a lower bound of Ω( k ) for their competitive ratio.
Some deterministic algorithms also have a competitive ratio with an O ( k )
upper bound, but some other deterministic algorithms are considerably
worse, having a competitive ratio of Θ( n / k ).
W e now proceed to analyze the LIFO and LRU policies. In addition to
assuming that n  > k , we will assume that at least k  distinct blocks are
requested. Otherwise, the cache never fills up and no blocks are evicted, so
that all algorithms exhibit the same behavior . W e begin by showing that
LIFO has a lar ge competitive ratio.
Page number: 946
Theorem 27.2
LIFO has a competitive ratio of Θ( n / k ) for the online caching problem with
n  requests and a cache of size k .
Proof    W e first show a lower bound of Ω( n / k ). Suppose that the input
consists of k  + 1 blocks, numbered 1, 2, … , k  + 1, and the request sequence
is
1, 2, 3, 4, … , k , k  + 1, k , k  + 1, k , k  + 1, … ,
where after the initial 1, 2, … , k , k  + 1, the remainder of the sequence
alternates between k  and k  + 1, with a total of n  requests. The sequence ends
on block k  if n  and k  are either both even or both odd, and otherwise, the
sequence ends on block k +1. That is, bi  = i  for i  = 1, 2, … k −1, bi  = k +1 for i
= k +1, k +3, … and bi  = k  for i  = k , k  + 2, …. How many blocks does LIFO
evict? After the first k  requests (which are considered to be cache misses),
the cache is filled with blocks 1, 2, … , k . The ( k  + 1)st request, which is for
block k  + 1, causes block k  to be evicted. The ( k  + 2)nd request, which is for
block k , forces block k  + 1 to be evicted, since that block was just placed
into the cache. This behavior continues, alternately evicting blocks k  and
k +1 for the remaining requests. LIFO, therefore, suf fers a cache miss on
every one of the n  requests.
The optimal of fline algorithm knows the entire sequence of requests in
advance. Upon the first request of block k  + 1, it just evicts any block
except block k , and then it never evicts another block. Thus, the optimal
of fline algorithm evicts only once. Since the first k  requests are considered
cache misses, the total number of cache misses is k  + 1. The competitive
ratio, therefore, is n /( k  + 1), or Ω( n / k ).
For the upper bound, observe that on any input of size n , any caching
algorithm incurs at most n  cache misses. Because the input contains at least
k  distinct blocks, any caching algorithm, including the optimal of fline
algorithm, must incur at least k  cache misses. Therefore, LIFO has a
competitive ratio of O ( n / k ).
▪
W e call such a competitive ratio unbounded , because it grows with the
input size. Exercise 27.3-2 asks you to show that LFU also has an
unbounded competitive ratio.
Page number: 947
FIFO and LRU have a much better competitive ratio of Θ( k ). There is a
big dif ference between competitive ratios of Θ( n / k ) and Θ( k ). The cache
size k  is independent of the input sequence and does not grow as more
requests arrive over time. A competitive ratio that depends on n , on the
other hand, does grow with the size of the input sequence and thus can get
quite lar ge. It is preferable to use an algorithm with a competitive ratio that
does not grow with the input sequence’ s size, when possible.
W e now show that LRU has a competitive ratio of Θ( k ), first showing
the upper bound.
Theorem 27.3
LRU has a competitive ratio of O ( k ) for the online caching problem with n
requests and a cache of size k .
Proof    T o analyze LRU, we will divide the sequence of requests into
epochs . Epoch 1 begins with the first request. Epoch i , for i  > 1, begins
upon encountering the ( k  + 1)st distinct request since the beginning of
epoch i  − 1. Consider the following example of requests with k  = 3:
The first k  = 3 distinct requests are for blocks 1, 2 and 5, so epoch 2 begins
with the first request for block 4. In epoch 2, the first 3 distinct requests are
for blocks 4, 1, and 2. Requests for these blocks recur until the request for
block 3, and with this request epoch 3 begins. Thus, this example has four
epochs:
Now we consider the behavior of LRU. In each epoch, the first time a
request for a particular block appears, it may cause a cache miss, but
subsequent requests for that block within the epoch cannot cause a cache
miss, since the block is now one of the k  most recently used. For example,
in epoch 2, the first request for block 4 causes a cache miss, but the
subsequent requests for block 4 do not. (Exercise 27.3-1 asks you to show
the contents of the cache after each request.) In epoch 3, requests for blocks
3 and 5 cause cache misses, but the request for block 4 does not, because it
was recently accessed in epoch 2. Since only the first request for a block
within an epoch can cause a cache miss and the cache holds k  blocks, each
epoch incurs at most k  cache misses.
Page number: 948
Now consider the behavior of the optimal algorithm. The first request in
each epoch must cause a cache miss, even for an optimal algorithm. The
miss occurs because, by the definition of an epoch, there must  have been k
other blocks accessed since the last access to this block.
Since, for each epoch, the optimal algorithm incurs at least one miss and
LRU incurs at most k , the competitive ratio is at most k /1 = O ( k ).
▪
Exercise 27.3-3 asks you to show that FIFO also has a competitive ratio
of O ( k ).
W e could show lower bounds of Ω( k ) on LRU and FIFO, but in fact, we
can make a much stronger statement: any  deterministic online caching
algorithm must have a competitive ratio of Ω( k ). The proof relies on an
adversary who knows the online algorithm being used and can tailor the
future requests to cause the online algorithm to incur more cache misses
than the optimal of fline algorithm.
Consider a scenario in which the cache has size k  and the set of possible
blocks to request is {1, 2, … , k  + 1}. The first k  requests are for blocks 1,
2, … , k , so that both the adversary and the deterministic online algorithm
place these blocks into the cache. The next request is for block k  + 1. In
order to make room in the cache for block k  + 1, the online algorithm evicts
some block b1  from the cache. The adversary , knowing that the online
algorithm has just evicted block b1 , makes the next request be for b1 , so that
the online algorithm must evict some other block b2  to clear room in the
cache for b1 . As you might have guessed, the adversary makes the next
request be for block b2 , so that the online algorithm evicts some other block
b3  to make room for b2 . The online algorithm and the adversary continue in
this manner . The online algorithm incurs a cache miss on every request and
therefore incurs n  cache misses over the n  requests.
Now let’ s consider an optimal of fline algorithm, which knows the future.
As discussed in Section 15.4 , this algorithm is known as furthest-in-future,
and it always evicts the block whose next request is furthest in the future.
Since there are only k  + 1 unique blocks, when furthest-in-future evicts a
block, we know that it will not be accessed during at least the next k
requests. Thus, after the first k  cache misses, the optimal algorithm incurs a
Page number: 949
cache miss at most once every k  requests. Therefore, the number of cache
misses over n  requests is at most k  + n / k .
Since the deterministic online algorithm incurs n  cache misses and the
optimal of fline algorithm incurs at most k  + n / k  cache misses, the
competitive ratio is at least
For n  ≥ k2, the above expression is at least
Thus, for suf ficiently long request sequences, we have shown the following:
Theorem 27.4
Any deterministic online algorithm for caching with a cache size of k  has
competitive ratio Ω( k ).
▪
Although we can analyze the common caching strategies from the point
of view of competitive analysis, the results are somewhat unsatisfying. Y es,
we can distinguish between algorithms with a competitive ratio of Θ( k ) and
those with unbounded competitive ratios. In the end, however , all of these
competitive ratios are rather high. The online algorithms we have seen so
far are deterministic, and it is this property that the adversary is able to
exploit.
27.3.2    Randomized caching algorithms
If we don’ t limit ourselves to deterministic online algorithms, we can use
randomization to develop an online caching algorithm with a significantly
smaller competitive ratio. Before describing the algorithm, let’ s discuss
randomization in online algorithms in general. Recall that we analyze
online algorithms with respect to an adversary who knows the online
algorithm and can design requests knowing the decisions made by the
online algorithm. W ith randomization, we must ask whether the adversary
also knows the random choices made by the online algorithm. An adversary
who does not know the random choices is oblivious , and an adversary who
knows the random choices is nonoblivious . Ideally , we prefer to design
Page number: 950
algorithms against a nonoblivious adversary , as this adversary is stronger
than an oblivious one. Unfortunately , a nonoblivious adversary mitigates
much of the power of randomness, as an adversary who knows the outcome
of random choices typically can act as if the online algorithm is
deterministic. The oblivious adversary , on the other hand, does not know
the random choices of the online algorithm, and that is the adversary we
typically use.
As a simple illustration of the dif ference between an oblivious and
nonoblivious adversary , imagine that you are flipping a fair coin n  times,
and the adversary wants to know how many heads you flipped. A
nonoblivious adversary knows, after each flip, whether the coin came up
heads or tails, and hence knows how many heads you flipped. An oblivious
adversary , on the other hand, knows only that you are flipping a fair coin n
times. The oblivious adversary , therefore, can reason that the number of
heads follows a binomial distribution, so that the expected number of heads
is n /2 (by equation (C.41) on page 1 199) and the variance is n /4 (by
equation (C.44) on page 1200). But the oblivious adversary has no way of
knowing exactly how many heads you actually flipped.
Let’ s return to caching. W e’ll start with a deterministic algorithm and
then randomize it. The algorithm we’ll use is an approximation of LRU
called M ARKING . Rather than “least recently used,” think of M ARKING  as
simply “recently used.” M ARKING  maintains a 1-bit attribute mark  for each
block in the cache. Initially , all blocks in the cache are unmarked. When a
block is requested, if it is already in the cache, it is marked. If the request is
a cache miss, M ARKING  checks to see whether there are any unmarked
blocks in the cache. If all blocks are marked, then they are all changed to
unmarked. Now , regardless of whether all blocks in the cache were marked
when the request occurred, there is at least one unmarked block in the
cache, and so an arbitrary unmarked block is evicted, and the requested
block is placed into the cache and marked.
How should the block to evict from among the unmarked blocks in the
cache be chosen? The procedure R ANDOMIZED -M ARKING  on the next page
shows the process when the block is chosen randomly . The procedure takes
as input a block b  being requested.
R ANDOMIZED -M ARKING ( b )
1 if  block b  resides in the cache,
Page number: 951
2 b.mark  = 1
3 else
4 if  all blocks b ′ in the cache have b ′. mark  = 1
5 unmark all blocks b ′ in the cache, setting b ′. mark  = 0
6 select an unmarked block u  with u . mark  = 0 uniformly at random
7 evict block u
8 place block b  into the cache
9 b . mark  = 1
For the purpose of analysis, we say that a new epoch begins immediately
after each time line 5 executes. An epoch starts with no marked blocks in
the cache. The first time a block is requested during an epoch, the number
of marked blocks increases by 1, and any subsequent requests to that block
do not change the number of marked blocks. Therefore, the number of
marked blocks monotonically increases within an epoch. Under this view ,
epochs are the same as in the proof of Theorem 27.3: with a cache that
holds k  blocks, an epoch comprises requests for k  distinct blocks (possibly
fewer for the final epoch), and the next epoch begins upon a request for a
block not in those k .
Because we are going to analyze a randomized algorithm, we will
compute the expected competitive ratio. Recall that for an input I , we
denote the solution value of an online algorithm A  by A ( I ) and the solution
value of an optimal algorithm F  by F ( I ). Online algorithm A  has an
expected competitive ratio  c  if for all inputs I , we have
where the expectation is taken over the random choices made by A .
Although the deterministic M ARKING  algorithm has a competitive ratio
of Θ( k ) (Theorem 27.4 provides the lower bound and see Exercise 27.3-4
for the upper bound), R ANDOMIZED -M ARKING  has a much smaller expected
competitive ratio, namely O (lg k ). The key to the improved competitive
ratio is that the adversary cannot always make a request for a block that is
not in the cache, since an oblivious adversary does not know which blocks
are in the cache.
Theorem 27.5
R ANDOMIZED -M ARKING  has an expected competitive ratio of O (lg k ) for the
online caching problem with n  requests and a cache of size k , against an
oblivious adversary .
Page number: 952
Before proving Theorem 27.5, we prove a basic probabilistic fact.
Lemma 27.6
Suppose that a bag contains x  + y  balls: x  − 1 blue balls, y  white balls, and 1
red ball. Y ou repeatedly choose a ball at random and remove it from the bag
until you have chosen a total of m  balls that are either blue or red, where m
≤ x . Y ou set aside each white ball you choose. Then, one of the balls chosen
is the red ball with probability m / x .
Proof    Choosing a white ball does not af fect how many blue or red balls
are chosen in any way . Therefore, we can continue the analysis as if there
were no white balls and the bag contains just x  − 1 blue balls and 1 red ball.
Let A  be the event that the red ball is not chosen, and let Ai  be the event
that the i th draw does not choose the red ball. By equation (C.22) on page
1 190, we have
The probability Pr{ A1 } that the first ball is blue equals ( x  − 1)/ x , since
initially there are x  − 1 blue balls and 1 red ball. More generally , we have
since the i th draw is from x  − i  blue balls and 1 red ball. Equations (27.13)
and (27.14) give
The right-hand side of equation (27.15) is a telescoping product, similar to
the telescoping series in equation (A.12) on page 1 143. The numerator of
one term equals the denominator of the next, so that everything except the
first denominator and last numerator cancel, and we obtain Pr{ A } = ( x  −
m )/ x . Since we actually want to compute Pr{ Ā } = 1 − Pr{ A }, that is, the
probability that the red ball is  chosen, we get Pr{ Ā } = 1 − ( x  − m )/ x  = m / x .
▪
Now we can prove Theorem 27.5.
Page number: 953
Proof    W e’ll analyze R ANDOMIZED -M ARKING  one epoch at a time. W ithin
epoch i , any request for a block b  that is not the first request for block b  in
epoch i  must result in a cache hit, since after the first request in epoch i ,
block b  resides in the cache and is marked, so that it cannot be evicted
during the epoch. Therefore, since we are counting cache misses, we’ll
consider only the first request for each block within each epoch,
disregarding all other requests.
W e can classify the requests in an epoch as either old or new . If block b
resides in the cache at the start of epoch i , each request for block b  during
epoch i  is an old request . Old requests in epoch i  are for blocks requested in
epoch i  − 1. If a request in epoch i  is not old, it is a new request , and it is
for a block not requested in epoch i  − 1. All requests in epoch 1 are new .
For example, let’ s look again at the request sequence in example (27.1 1):
1, 2, 1, 5 4, 4, 1, 2, 4, 2 3, 4, 5 2, 2, 1, 2, 2.
Since we can disregard all requests for a block within an epoch other than
the first request, to analyze the cache behavior , we can view this request
sequence as just
1, 2, 5 4, 1, 2 3, 4, 5 2, 1.
All three requests in epoch 1 are new . In epoch 2, the requests for blocks 1
and 2 are old, but the request for block 4 is new . In epoch 3, the request for
block 4 is old, and the requests for blocks 3 and 5 are new . Both requests in
epoch 4 are new .
W ithin an epoch, each new request must cause a cache miss since, by
definition, the block is not already in the cache. An old request, on the other
hand, may or may not cause a cache miss. The old block is in the cache at
the beginning of the epoch, but other requests might cause it to be evicted.
Returning to our example, in epoch 2, the request for block 4 must cause a
cache miss, as this request is new . The request for block 1, which is old,
may or may not cause a cache miss. If block 1 was evicted when block 4
was requested, then a cache miss occurs and block 1 must be brought back
into the cache. If instead block 1 was not evicted when block 4 was
requested, then the request for block 1 results in a cache hit. The request for
block 2 could incur a cache miss under two scenarios. One is if block 2 was
evicted when block 4 was requested. The other is if block 1 was evicted
when block 4 was requested, and then block 2 was evicted when block 1
Page number: 954
was requested. W e see that, within an epoch, each ensuing old request has
an increasing chance of causing a cache miss.
Because we consider only the first request for each block within an
epoch, we assume that each epoch contains exactly k  requests, and each
request within an epoch is for a unique block. (The last epoch might contain
fewer than k  requests. If it does, just add dummy requests to fill it out to k
requests.) In epoch i , denote the number of new requests by ri  ≥ 1 (an epoch
must contain at least one new request), so that the number of old requests is
k  − ri . As mentioned above, a new request always incurs a cache miss.
Let us now focus on an arbitrary epoch i  to obtain a bound on the
expected number of cache misses within that epoch. In particular , let’ s think
about the j th old request within the epoch, where 1 ≤ j  < k . Denote by bij  the
block requested in the j th old request of epoch i , and denote by nij  and oij
the number of new and old requests, respectively , that occur within epoch i
but before the j th old request. Because j  − 1 old requests occur before the
j th old request, we have oij  = j  − 1. W e will show that the probability of a
cache miss upon the j  th old request is nij /( k  − oij ), or nij /( k  − j  + 1).
Start by considering the first old request, for block bi ,1 . What is the
probability that this request causes a cache miss? It causes a cache miss
precisely when one of the ni ,1  previous requests resulted in bi ,1  being
evicted. W e can determine the probability that bi ,1  was chosen for eviction
by using Lemma 27.6: consider the k  blocks in the cache to be k  balls, with
block bi ,1  as the red ball, the other k  − 1 blocks as the k  − 1 blue balls, and
no white balls. Each of the ni ,1  requests chooses a block to evict with equal
probability , corresponding to drawing balls ni ,1  times. Thus, we can apply
Lemma 27.6 with x  = k , y  = 0, and m  = ni ,1 , deriving the probability of a
cache miss upon the first old request as ni ,1 / k , which equals nij /( k  − j  + 1)
since j  = 1.
In order to determine the probability of a cache miss for subsequent old
requests, we’ll need an additional observation. Let’ s consider the second old
request, which is for block bi ,2 . This request causes a cache miss precisely
when one of the previous requests evicts bi ,2 . Let’ s consider two cases,
based on the request for bi ,1 . In the first case, suppose that the request for
bi ,1  did not cause an eviction, because bi ,1  was already in the cache. Then,
Page number: 955
the only way that bi ,2  could have been evicted is by one of the ni ,2  new
requests that precedes it. What is the probability that this eviction happens?
There are ni ,2  chances for bi ,2  to be evicted, but we also know that there is
one block in the cache, namely bi ,1 , that is not evicted. Thus, we can again
apply Lemma 27.6, but with bi ,1  as the white ball, bi ,2  as the red ball, the
remaining blocks as the blue balls, and drawing balls ni ,2  times. Applying
Lemma 27.6, with x  = k  − 1, y  = 1, and m  = ni ,2 , we find that the probability
of a cache miss is ni ,2 /( k  − 1). In the second case, the request for bi ,1  does
cause an eviction, which can happen only if one of the new requests
preceding the request for bi ,1  evicts bi ,1 . Then, the request for bi ,1  brings bi ,1
back into the cache and evicts some other block. In this case, we know that
of the new requests, one of them did not result in bi ,2  being evicted, since
bi ,1  was evicted. Therefore, ni ,2  − 1 new requests could evict bi ,2 , as could
the request for bi ,1 , so that the number of requests that could evict bi ,2  is ni ,2 .
Each such request evicts a block chosen from among k  − 1 blocks, since the
request that resulted in evicting bi ,1  did not also cause bi ,2  to be evicted.
Therefore, we can apply Lemma 27.6, with x  = k  − 1, y  = 1, and m  = ni ,2 ,
and get that the probability of a miss is ni ,2 /( k  − 1). In both cases the
probability is the same, and it equals nij /( k  − j  + 1) since j  = 2.
More generally , oij  old requests occur before the j th old request. Each of
these prior old requests either caused an eviction or did not. For those that
caused an eviction, it is because they were evicted by a previous request,
and for those that did not cause an eviction, it is because they were not
evicted by any previous request. In either case, we can decrease the number
of blocks that the random process is choosing from by 1 for each old
request, and thus oij  requests cannot cause bij  to be evicted. Therefore, we
can use Lemma 27.6 to determine the probability that bij  was evicted by a
previous request, with x  = k  − oij , y  = oij  and m  = nij . Thus, we have proven
our claim that the probability of a cache miss on the j th request for an old
block is nij /( k  − oij ), or nij /( k  − j  + 1). Since nij  ≤ ri  (recall that ri  is the
number of new requests during epoch i ), we have an upper bound of ri /( k  −
j  + 1) on the probability that the j th old request incurs a cache miss.
Page number: 956
W e can now compute the expected number of misses during epoch i
using indicator random variables, as introduced in Section 5.2 . W e define
indicator random variables
Yij  = I{the j th old request in epoch i  incurs a cache miss},
Zij  = I{the j  th new request in epoch i  incurs a cache miss}.
W e have Zij  = 1 for j  = 1, 2, … , ri , since every new request results in a
cache miss. Let Xi  be the random variable denoting the number of cache
misses during epoch i , so that
and so
where Hk  is the k th harmonic number .
T o compute the expected total number of cache misses, we sum over all
epochs. Let p  denote the number of epochs and X  be the random variable
denoting the number of cache misses. Then, we have 
 , so that
Page number: 957
T o complete the analysis, we need to understand the behavior of the
optimal of fline algorithm. It could make a completely dif ferent set of
decisions from those made by R ANDOMIZED -M ARKING , and at any point its
cache may look nothing like the cache of the randomized algorithm. Y et, we
want to relate the number of cache misses of the optimal of fline algorithm
to the value in inequality (27.17), in order to have a competitive ratio that
does not depend on 
 . Focusing on individual epochs won’ t suf fice. At
the beginning of any epoch, the of fline algorithm might have loaded the
cache with exactly the blocks that will be requested in that epoch.
Therefore, we cannot take any one epoch in isolation and claim that an
of fline algorithm must suf fer any cache misses during that epoch.
If we consider two consecutive epochs, however , we can better analyze
the optimal of fline algorithm. Consider two consecutive epochs, i  −1 and i .
Each contains k  requests for k  dif ferent blocks. (Recall our assumption that
all requests are first requests in an epoch.) Epoch i  contains ri  requests for
new blocks, that is, blocks that were not requested during epoch i  − 1.
Therefore, the number of distinct requests during epochs i −1 and i  is exactly
k + ri . No matter what the cache contents were at the beginning of epoch i  −
1, after k  + ri  distinct requests, there must be at least ri  cache misses. There
could be more, but there is no way to have fewer . Letting mi  denote the
number of cache misses of the of fline algorithm during epoch i , we have
just ar gued that
The total number of cache misses of the of fline algorithm is
Page number: 958
The justification m1  = r1  for the last equality follows because, by our
assumptions, the cache starts out empty and every request incurs a cache
miss in the first epoch, even for the optimal of fline adversary .
T o conclude the analysis, because we have an upper bound of 
on the expected number of cache misses for R ANDOMIZED -M ARKING  and a
lower bound of 
  on the number of cache misses for the optimal
of fline algorithm, the expected competitive ratio is at most
▪
Exer cises
27.3-1
For the cache sequence (27.10), show the contents of the cache after each
request and count the number of cache misses. How many misses does each
epoch incur?
27.3-2
Show that LFU has a competitive ratio of Θ( n / k ) for the online caching
problem with n  requests and a cache of size k .
27.3-3
Show that FIFO has a competitive ratio of O ( k ) for the online caching
problem with n  requests and a cache of size k .
Page number: 959
27.3-4
Show that the deterministic M ARKING  algorithm has a competitive ratio of
O ( k ) for the online caching problem with n  requests and a cache of size k .
27.3-5
Theorem 27.4 shows that any deterministic online algorithm for caching has
a competitive ratio of Ω( k ), where k  is the cache size. One way in which an
algorithm might be able to perform better is to have some ability to know
what the next few requests will be. W e say that an algorithm is l-lookahead
if it has the ability to look ahead at the next l  requests. Prove that for every
constant l  ≥ 0 and every cache size k  ≥1, every deterministic l -lookahead
algorithm has competitive ratio Ω( k ).
Pr oblems
27-1     Cow-path problem
The Appalachian T rail (A T) is a marked hiking trail in the eastern United
States extending between Springer Mountain in Geor gia and Mount
Katahdin in Maine. The trail is about 2,190 miles long. Y ou decide that you
are going to hike the A T from Geor gia to Maine and back. Y ou plan to learn
more about algorithms while on the trail, and so you bring along your copy
of Intr oduction to Algorithms  in your backpack.2 Y ou have already read
through this chapter before starting out. Because the beauty of the trail
distracts you, you for get about reading this book until you have reached
Maine and hiked halfway back to Geor gia. At that point, you decide that
you have already seen the trail and want to continue reading the rest of the
book, starting with Chapter 28 . Unfortunately , you find that the book is no
longer in your pack. Y ou must have left it somewhere along the trail, but
you don’ t know where. It could be anywhere between Geor gia and Maine.
Y ou want to find the book, but now that you have learned something about
online algorithms, you want your algorithm for finding it to have a good
competitive ratio. That is, no matter where the book is, if its distance from
you is x  miles away , you would like to be sure that you do not walk more
than cx  miles to find it, for some constant c . Y ou do not know x , though you
may assume that x  ≥ 1.3
Page number: 960
What algorithm should you use, and what constant c  can you prove
bounds the total distance cx  that you would have to walk? Y our algorithm
should work for a trail of any length, not just the 2,190-mile-long A T .
27-2     Online scheduling to minimize average completion time
Problem 15-2 discusses scheduling to minimize average completion time on
one machine, without release times and preemption and with release times
and preemption. Now you will develop an online algorithm for
nonpreemptively scheduling a set of tasks with release times. Suppose you
are given a set S  = { a1 , a2 , … , an } of tasks, where task ai  has release
time  ri , before which it cannot start, and requires pi  units of processing time
to complete once it has started. Y ou have one computer on which to run the
tasks. T asks cannot be preempted , which is to say that once started, a task
must run to completion without interruption. (See Problem 15-2 on page
446 for a more detailed description of this problem.) Given a schedule, let
Ci  be the completion time  of task ai , that is, the time at which task ai
completes processing. Y our goal is to find a schedule that minimizes the
average completion time, that is, to minimize 
 .
In the online version of this problem, you learn about task i  only when it
arrives at its release time ri , and at that point, you know its processing time
pi . The of fline version of this problem is NP-hard (see Chapter 34 ), but you
will develop a 2-competitive online algorithm.
a.  Show that, if there are release times, scheduling by shortest processing
time (when the machine becomes idle, start the already released task with
the smallest processing time that has not yet run) is not d -competitive for
any constant d .
In order to develop an online algorithm, consider the preemptive version
of this problem, which is discussed in Problem 15-2(b). One way to
schedule is to run the tasks according to the shortest remaining processing
time (SRPT) order . That is, at any point, the machine is running the
available task with the smallest amount of remaining processing time.
b.  Explain how to run SRPT as an online algorithm.
c.  Suppose that you run SRPT and obtain completion times 
 . Show
that
Page number: 961
where the 
  are the completion times in an optimal nonpreemptive
schedule.
Consider the (of fline) algorithm C OMPLETION -T IME -S CHEDULE .
C OMPLETION -T IME -S CHEDULE ( S )
1 compute an optimal schedule for the preemptive version of the problem
2 renumber the tasks so that the completion times in the optimal preemptive schedule are ordered
by their completion times 
  in SRPT order
3 greedily schedule the tasks nonpreemptively in the renumbered order a 1 , … , a n
4 let C 1 , … , C n  be the completion times of renumbered tasks a 1 , … , a n  in this nonpreemptive
schedule
5 r eturn  C 1 , … , C n
d.  Prove that 
  for i  = 1, … , n .
e.  Prove that 
  for i  = 1, … , n .
f.  Algorithm C OMPLETION -T IME -S CHEDULE  is an of fline algorithm. Explain
how to modify it to produce an online algorithm.
g.  Combine parts (c)–(f) to show that the online version of C OMPLETION -
T IME -S CHEDULE  is 2-competitive.
Chapter notes
Online algorithms are widely used in many domains. Some good overviews
include the textbook by Borodin and El-Y aniv [ 68 ], the collection of
surveys edited by Fiat and W oeginger [ 142 ], and the survey by Albers [ 14 ].
The move-to-front heuristic from Section 27.2  was analyzed by Sleator
and T arjan [ 416 , 417 ] as part of their early work on amortized analysis. This
rule works quite well in practice.
Competitive analysis of online caching also originated with Sleator and
T arjan [ 417 ]. The randomized marking algorithm was proposed and
analyzed by Fiat et al. [ 141 ]. Y oung [ 464 ] surveys online caching and
paging algorithms, and Buchbinder and Naor [ 76 ] survey primal-dual
online algorithms.
Page number: 962
Specific types of online algorithms are described using other names.
Dynamic graph algorithms  are online algorithms on graphs, where at each
step a vertex or edge under goes modification. T ypically a vertex or edge is
either inserted or deleted, or some associated property , such as edge weight,
changes. Some graph problems need to be solved again after each change to
the graph, and a good dynamic graph algorithm will not need to solve from
scratch. For example, edges are inserted and deleted, and after each change
to the graph, the minimum spanning tree is recomputed. Exercise 21.2-8
asks such a question. Similar questions can be asked for other graph
algorithms, such as shortest paths, connectivity , or matching. The first paper
in this field is credited to Even and Shiloach [ 138 ], who study how to
maintain a shortest-path tree as edges are being deleted from a graph. Since
then hundreds of papers have been published. Demetrescu et al. [ 1 10 ]
survey early developments in dynamic graph algorithms.
For massive data sets, the input data might be too lar ge to store.
Streaming algorithms  model this situation by requiring the memory used
by an algorithm to be significantly smaller than the input size. For example,
you may have a graph with n  vertices and m  edges with m  ≫  n , but the
memory allowed may be only O ( n ). Or you may have n  numbers, but the
memory allowed may only be O (lg n ) or 
 . A streaming algorithm is
measured by the number of passes made over the data in addition to the
running time of the algorithm. McGregor [ 322 ] surveys streaming
algorithms for graphs and Muthukrishnan [ 341 ] surveys general streaming
algorithms.
1 The path-compression heuristic in Section 19.3  resembles M OVE -T O -F RONT , although it would
be more accurately expressed as “move-to-next-to-front.” Unlike M OVE -T O -F RONT  in a doubly
linked list, path compression can relocate multiple elements to become “next-to-front.”
2 This book is heavy . W e do not recommend that you carry it on a long hike.
3 In case you’re wondering what this problem has to do with cows, some papers about it frame the
problem as a cow looking for a field in which to graze.
Page number: 963
28        Matrix Operations
Because operations on matrices lie at the heart of scientific computing,
ef ficient algorithms for working with matrices have many practical
applications. This chapter focuses on how to multiply matrices and solve
sets of simultaneous linear equations. Appendix D  reviews the basics of
matrices.
Section 28.1  shows how to solve a set of linear equations using LUP
decompositions. Then, Section 28.2  explores the close relationship between
multiplying and inverting matrices. Finally , Section 28.3  discusses the
important class of symmetric positive-definite matrices and shows how to
use them to find a least-squares solution to an overdetermined set of linear
equations.
One important issue that arises in practice is numerical stability .
Because actual computers have limits to how precisely they can represent
floating-point numbers, round-of f errors in numerical computations may
become amplified over the course of a computation, leading to incorrect
results. Such computations are called numerically unstable . Although we’ll
briefly consider numerical stability on occasion, we won’ t focus on it in this
chapter . W e refer you to the excellent book by Higham [ 216 ] for a thorough
discussion of stability issues.
28.1    Solving systems of linear equations
Numerous applications need to solve sets of simultaneous linear equations.
A linear system can be cast as a matrix equation in which each matrix or
vector element belongs to a field, typically the real numbers ℝ . This section
Page number: 964
discusses how to solve a system of linear equations using a method called
LUP decomposition.
The process starts with a set of linear equations in n  unknowns x1 , x2 , …
, xn :
A solution  to the equations (28.1) is a set of values for x1 , x2 , … , xn  that
satisfy all of the equations simultaneously . In this section, we treat only the
case in which there are exactly n  equations in n  unknowns.
Next, rewrite equations (28.1) as the matrix-vector equation
or , equivalently , letting A  = ( aij ), x  = ( xi ), and b  = ( bi ), as
If A  is nonsingular , it possesses an inverse A−1, and
is the solution vector . W e can prove that x  is the unique solution to equation
(28.2) as follows. If there are two solutions, x  and x ′, then Ax  = Ax ′ = b  and,
letting I  denote an identity matrix,
x = Ix
=( A−1A ) x
=A−1( Ax )
=A−1( Ax ′)
=( A−1A ) x ′
= Ix ′
= x ′.
This section focuses on the case in which A  is nonsingular or ,
equivalently (by Theorem D.1 on page 1220), the rank of A  equals the
Page number: 965
number n  of unknowns. There are other possibilities, however , which merit
a brief discussion. If the number of equations is less than the number n  of
unknowns—or , more generally , if the rank of A  is less than n —then the
system is underdetermined . An underdetermined system typically has
infinitely many solutions, although it may have no solutions at all if the
equations are inconsistent. If the number of equations exceeds the number n
of unknowns, the system is overdetermined , and there may not exist any
solutions. Section 28.3  addresses the important problem of finding good
approximate solutions to overdetermined systems of linear equations.
Let’ s return to the problem of solving the system Ax  = b  of n  equations
in n  unknowns. One option is to compute A−1 and then, using equation
(28.3), multiply b  by A−1, yielding x  = A−1b . This approach suf fers in
practice from numerical instability . Fortunately , another approach—LUP
decomposition—is numerically stable and has the further advantage of
being faster in practice.
Overview of LUP decomposition
The idea behind LUP decomposition is to find three n  × n  matrices L , U ,
and P  such that
where
L  is a unit lower -triangular matrix,
U  is an upper -triangular matrix, and
P  is a permutation matrix.
W e call matrices L , U , and P  satisfying equation (28.4) an LUP
decomposition  of the matrix A . W e’ll show that every nonsingular matrix A
possesses such a decomposition.
Computing an LUP decomposition for the matrix A  has the advantage
that linear systems can be ef ficiently solved when they are triangular , as is
the case for both matrices L  and U . If you have an LUP decomposition for
A , you can solve equation (28.2), Ax  = b , by solving only triangular linear
systems, as follows. Multiply both sides of Ax  = b  by P , yielding the
equivalent equation P Ax  = Pb . By Exercise D.1-4 on page 1219,
Page number: 966
multiplying both sides by a permutation matrix amounts to permuting the
equations (28.1). By the decomposition (28.4), substituting LU  for P A  gives
LUx  = Pb .
Y ou can now solve this equation by solving two triangular linear systems.
Define y  = Ux , where x  is the desired solution vector . First, solve the lower -
triangular system
for the unknown vector y  by a method called “forward substitution.”
Having solved for y , solve the upper -triangular system
for the unknown x  by a method called “back substitution.” Why does this
process solve Ax  = b ? Because the permutation matrix P  is invertible (see
Exercise D.2-3 on page 1223), multiplying both sides of equation (28.4) by
P  −1 gives P−1P A  = P−1LU , so that
Hence, the vector x  that satisfies Ux  = y  is the solution to Ax  = b :
Ax =P−1LUx(by equation (28.7))
=P−1L y(by equation (28.6))
=P−1Pb(by equation (28.5))
= b .
The next step is to show how forward and back substitution work and
then attack the problem of computing the LUP decomposition itself.
Forward and back substitution
Forward substitution  can solve the lower -triangular system (28.5) in Θ( n2)
time, given L , P , and b . An array π [1 : n ] provides a more compact format
to represent the permutation P  than an n  × n  matrix that is mostly 0s. For i  =
1, 2, … , n , the entry π [ i ] indicates that Pi,π [ i ]  = 1 and Pij  = 0 for j  ≠ π [ i ].
Thus, P A  has aπ [ i ], j  in row i  and column j , and Pb  has bπ [ i ]  as its i th element.
Since L  is unit lower -triangular , the matrix equation L y  = Pb  is equivalent to
the n  equations
Page number: 967
   y 1 = b π [1] ,
l 21 y 1  + y 2 = b π [2] ,
l 31 y 1  + l 32 y 2  + y 3 = b π [3] ,
⋮
l n 1 y 1  + l n 2 y 2  + l n 3 y 3  + ⋯  + y n= b π [ n ] .
The first equation gives y1  = bπ [1]  directly . Knowing the value of y1 , you can
substitute it into the second equation, yielding
y2  = bπ [2]  − l21 y1 .
Next, you can substitute both y1  and y2  into the third equation, obtaining
y3  = bπ [3]  − ( l31 y1  + l32 y2 ).
In general, you substitute y1 , y2 , … , yi −1  “forward” into the i th equation to
solve for yi :
Once you’ve solved for y , you can solve for x  in equation (28.6) using
back substitution , which is similar to forward substitution. This time, you
solve the n th equation first and work backward to the first equation. Like
forward substitution, this process runs in Θ( n2) time. Since U  is upper -
triangular , the matrix equation Ux  = y  is equivalent to the n  equations
u 1 1 x 1  + u 12 x 2  + ⋯  + u 1, n −2 x n −2  + u 1, n −1 x n −1  + u 1 n x n = y 1 ,
u 22 x 2  + ⋯  + u 2, n −2 x n −2  + u 2, n −1 x n −1  + u 2 n x n = y 2 ,
⋮
u n −2, n −2 x n −2  + u n −2, n −1 x n −1  + u n −2, n x n = y n −2 ,
u n −1, n −1 x n −1  + u n −1, n x n = y n −1 ,
u n,n x n = y n .
Thus, you can solve for xn , xn −1 , … , x1  successively as follows:
x n = y n / u n,n ,
x n −1 = ( y n −1  − u n −1, n x n )/ u n −1, n −1 ,
x n −2 = ( y n −2  − ( u n −2, n −1 x n −1  + u n −2, n x n ))/ u n −2, n −2,
⋮
Page number: 968
or , in general,
Given P , L , U , and b , the procedure LUP-S OL VE  on the next page solves
for x  by combining forward and back substitution. The permutation matrix
P  is represented by the array π . The procedure first solves for y  using
forward substitution in lines 2–3, and then it solves for x  using backward
substitution in lines 4–5. Since the summation within each of the for  loops
includes an implicit loop, the running time is Θ( n2).
As an example of these methods, consider the system of linear equations
defined by Ax  = b , where
LUP-S OL VE ( L , U , π , b , n )
1 let x  and y  be new vectors of length n
2 for  i  = 1 to  n
3
4 for  i  = n  downto  1
5
6 r eturn  x
and we want to solve for the unknown x . The LUP decomposition is
(Y ou might want to verify that P A  = LU .) Using forward substitution, solve
L y  = Pb  for y :
obtaining

Page number: 969
by computing first y1 , then y2 , and finally y3 . Then, using back substitution,
solve Ux  = y  for x :
thereby obtaining the desired answer
by computing first x3 , then x2 , and finally x1 .
Computing an LU decomposition
Given an LUP decomposition for a nonsingular matrix A , you can use
forward and back substitution to solve the system Ax  = b  of linear
equations. Now let’ s see how to ef ficiently compute an LUP decomposition
for A . W e start with the simpler case in which A  is an n  × n  nonsingular
matrix and P  is absent (or , equivalently , P  = In , the n  × n  identity matrix), so
that A  = LU . W e call the two matrices L  and U  an LU decomposition  of A .
T o create an LU decomposition, we’ll use a process known as Gaussian
elimination . Start by subtracting multiples of the first equation from the
other equations in order to remove the first variable from those equations.
Then subtract multiples of the second equation from the third and
subsequent equations so that now the first and second variables are removed
from them. Continue this process until the system that remains has an
upper -triangular form—this is the matrix U . The matrix L  comprises the
row multipliers that cause variables to be eliminated.
T o implement this strategy , let’ s start with a recursive formulation. The
input is an n  × n  nonsingular matrix A . If n  = 1, then nothing needs to be
done: just choose L  = I1  and U  = A . For n  > 1, break A  into four parts:

Page number: 970
where v  = ( a21 , a31 , … , an 1 ) is a column ( n −1)-vector , wT = ( a12 , a13 , … ,
a1 n )T is a row ( n  − 1)-vector , and A ′ is an ( n  − 1) × ( n  − 1) matrix. Then,
using matrix algebra (verify the equations by simply multiplying through),
factor A  as
The 0s in the first and second matrices of equation (28.9) are row and
column ( n  − 1)-vectors, respectively . The term vwT/ a1 1  is an ( n  − 1) × ( n  −
1) matrix formed by taking the outer product of v  and w  and dividing each
element of the result by a1 1 . Thus it conforms in size to the matrix A ′ from
which it is subtracted. The resulting ( n  − 1) × ( n  − 1) matrix
is called the Schur complement  of A  with respect to a1 1 .
W e claim that if A  is nonsingular , then the Schur complement is
nonsingular , too. Why? Suppose that the Schur complement, which is ( n  −
1) × ( n  − 1), is singular . Then by Theorem D.1, it has row rank strictly less
than n  − 1. Because the bottom n  − 1 entries in the first column of the
matrix
are all 0, the bottom n  − 1 rows of this matrix must have row rank strictly
less than n  − 1. The row rank of the entire matrix, therefore, is strictly less
than n . Applying Exercise D.2-8 on page 1223 to equation (28.9), A  has
rank strictly less than n , and from Theorem D.1, we derive the contradiction
that A  is singular .
Because the Schur complement is nonsingular , it, too, has an LU
decomposition, which we can find recursively . Let’ s say that
A ′ − vwT/ a1 1  = L ′ U ′,
where L ′ is unit lower -triangular and U ′ is upper -triangular . The LU
decomposition of A  is then A  = LU , with
Page number: 971
as shown by
Because L ′ is unit lower -triangular , so is L , and because U ′ is upper -
triangular , so is U .
Of course, if a1 1  = 0, this method doesn’ t work, because it divides by 0.
It also doesn’ t work if the upper leftmost entry of the Schur complement A ′
− vwT/ a1 1  is 0, since the next step of the recursion will divide by it. The
denominators in each step of LU decomposition are called pivots , and they
occupy the diagonal elements of the matrix U . The permutation matrix P
included in LUP decomposition provides a way to avoid dividing by 0, as
we’ll see below . Using permutations to avoid division by 0 (or by small
numbers, which can contribute to numerical instability), is called pivoting .
An important class of matrices for which LU decomposition always
works correctly is the class of symmetric positive-definite matrices. Such
matrices require no pivoting to avoid dividing by 0 in the recursive strategy
outlined above. W e will prove this result, as well as several others, in
Section 28.3 .
The pseudocode in the procedure LU-D ECOMPOSITION  follows the
recursive strategy , except that an iteration loop replaces the recursion. (This
transformation is a standard optimization for a “tail-recursive” procedure—
one whose last operation is a recursive call to itself. See Problem 7-5 on
page 202.) The procedure initializes the matrix U  with 0s below the
diagonal and matrix L  with 1s on its diagonal and 0s above the diagonal.
Each iteration works on a square submatrix, using its upper leftmost
element as the pivot to compute the v  and w  vectors and the Schur
complement, which becomes the square submatrix worked on by the next
iteration.
Page number: 972
LU-D ECOMPOSITION ( A , n )
  1 let L  and U  be new n  × n  matrices
  2 initialize U  with 0s below the diagonal
  3 initialize L  with 1s on the diagonal and 0s above the diagonal
  4 for  k  = 1 to  n
  5 u kk  = a kk
  6 for  i  = k  + 1 to  n
  7 l ik  = a ik / a kk //  a ik  holds v i
  8 u ki  = a ki //  a ki  holds w i
  9 for  i  = k  + 1 to  n //  compute the Schur complement …
10 for  j  = k  + 1 to  n
1 1 a ij  = a ij  − l ik u kj //  … and store it back into A
12 r eturn  L  and U
Each recursive step in the description above takes place in one iteration
of the outer for  loop of lines 4–1 1. W ithin this loop, line 5 determines the
pivot to be ukk  = akk . The for  loop in lines 6–8 (which does not execute
when k  = n ) uses the v  and w  vectors to update L  and U . Line 7 determines
the below-diagonal elements of L , storing vi / akk  in lik , and line 8 computes
the above-diagonal elements of U , storing wi  in uki . Finally , lines 9–1 1
compute the elements of the Schur complement and store them back into
the matrix A . (There is no need to divide by akk  in line 1 1 because that
already happened when line 7 computed lik .) Because line 1 1 is triply
nested, LU-D ECOMPOSITION  runs in Θ( n3) time.
Figure 28.1  illustrates the operation of LU-D ECOMPOSITION . It shows a
standard optimization of the procedure that stores the significant elements
of L  and U  in place in the matrix A . Each element aij  corresponds to either
lij  (if i  > j ) or uij  (if i  ≤ j ), so that the matrix A  holds both L  and U  when the
procedure terminates. T o obtain the pseudocode for this optimization from
the pseudocode for the LU-D ECOMPOSITION  procedure, just replace each
reference to l  or u  by a . Y ou can verify that this transformation preserves
correctness.
Page number: 973
Figur e 28.1  The operation of LU-D ECOMPOSITION . (a)  The matrix A . (b)  The result of the first
iteration of the outer for  loop of lines 4–1 1. The element a 1 1  = 2 highlighted in blue is the pivot, the
tan column is v / a 1 1 , and the tan row is wT. The elements of U  computed thus far are above the
horizontal line, and the elements of L  are to the left of the vertical line. The Schur complement matrix
A ′ − vwT/ a 1 1  occupies the lower right. (c)  The result of the next iteration of the outer for  loop, on the
Schur complement matrix from part (b). The element a 22  = 4 highlighted in blue is the pivot, and the
tan column and row are v / a 22  and wT (in the partitioning of the Schur complement), respectively .
Lines divide the matrix into the elements of U  computed so far (above), the elements of L  computed
so far (left), and the new Schur complement (lower right). (d)  After the next iteration, the matrix A  is
factored. The element 3 in the new Schur complement becomes part of U  when the recursion
terminates.) (e)  The factorization A  = LU .
Computing an LUP decomposition
If the diagonal of the matrix given to LU-D ECOMPOSITION  contains any 0s,
then the procedure will attempt to divide by 0, which would cause disaster .
Even if the diagonal contains no 0s, but does have numbers with small
absolute values, dividing by such numbers can cause numerical instabilities.
Therefore, LUP decomposition pivots on entries with the lar gest absolute
values that it can find.
In LUP decomposition, the input is an n  × n  nonsingular matrix A , with
a goal of finding a permutation matrix P , a unit lower -triangular matrix L ,
and an upper -triangular matrix U  such that P A  = LU . Before partitioning the
matrix A , as LU decomposition does, LUP decomposition moves a nonzero
element, say ak 1 , from somewhere in the first column to the (1, 1) position
of the matrix. For the greatest numerical stability , LUP decomposition
chooses the element in the first column with the greatest absolute value as
Page number: 974
ak 1 . (The first column cannot contain only 0s, for then A  would be singular ,
because its determinant would be 0, by Theorems D.4 and D.5 on page
1221.) In order to preserve the set of equations, LUP decomposition
exchanges row 1 with row k , which is equivalent to multiplying A  by a
permutation matrix Q  on the left (Exercise D.1-4 on page 1219). Thus, the
analog to equation (28.8) expresses QA  as
where v  = ( a21 , a31 , … , an 1 ), except that a1 1  replaces ak 1 ; wT = ( ak 2 , ak 3 , …
, akn )T; and A ′ is an ( n  − 1) × ( n  − 1) matrix. Since ak 1  ≠ 0, the analog to
equation (28.9) guarantees no division by 0:
Just as in LU decomposition, if A  is nonsingular , then the Schur
complement A ′ − vwT/ ak 1  is nonsingular , too. Therefore, you can
recursively find an LUP decomposition for it, with unit lower -triangular
matrix L ′, upper -triangular matrix U ′, and permutation matrix P ′, such that
P ′( A ′ − vwT/ ak 1 ) = L ′ U ′.
Define
which is a permutation matrix, since it is the product of two permutation
matrices (Exercise D.1-4 on page 1219). This definition of P  gives
Page number: 975
which yields the LUP decomposition. Because L ′ is unit lower -triangular , so
is L , and because U ′ is upper -triangular , so is U .
Notice that in this derivation, unlike the one for LU decomposition, both
the column vector v / ak 1  and the Schur complement A ′ − vwT/ ak 1  are
multiplied by the permutation matrix P ′. The procedure LUP-
DECOMPOSITION  gives the pseudocode for LUP decomposition.
LUP-D ECOMPOSITION ( A , n )
  1 let π [1 : n ] be a new array
  2 for  i  = 1 to  n
  3 π [ i ] = i //  initialize π  to the identity permutation
  4 for  k  = 1 to  n
  5 p  = 0
  6 for  i  = k  to  n //  find lar gest absolute value in column k
  7 if  | a ik | > p
  8 p  = | a ik |
  9 k ′ = i //  row number of the lar gest found so far
10 if  p  == 0
1 1 err or  “singular matrix”
12 exchange π [ k ] with π [ k ′]
13 for  i  = 1 to  n
14 exchange a ki  with a k′i //  exchange rows k  and k ′
15 for  i  = k  + 1 to  n
16 a ik  = a ik / a kk
17 for  j  = k  + 1 to  n
18 a ij  = a ij  − a ik a kj //  compute L  and U  in place in A
Like LU-D ECOMPOSITION , the LUP-D ECOMPOSITION  procedure replaces
the recursion with an iteration loop. As an improvement over a direct
Page number: 976
implementation of the recursion, the procedure dynamically maintains the
permutation matrix P  as an array π , where π [ i ] = j  means that the i th row of
P  contains a 1 in column j . The LUP-D ECOMPOSITION  procedure also
implements the improvement mentioned earlier , computing L  and U  in
place in the matrix A . Thus, when the procedure terminates,
Figure 28.2  illustrates how LUP-D ECOMPOSITION  factors a matrix. Lines
2–3 initialize the array π  to represent the identity permutation. The outer for
loop of lines 4–18 implements the recursion, finding an LUP decomposition
of the ( n  − k  + 1) × ( n  − k  + 1) submatrix whose upper left is in row k  and
column k . Each time through the outer loop, lines 5–9 determine the
element ak′k  with the lar gest absolute value of those in the current first
column (column k ) of the ( n  − k  + 1) × ( n  − k  + 1) submatrix that the
procedure is currently working on. If all elements in the current first column
are 0, lines 10–1 1 report that the matrix is singular . T o pivot, line 12
exchanges π [ k ′] with π [ k ], and lines 13–14 exchange the k th and k ′th rows
of A , thereby making the pivot element akk . (The entire rows are swapped
because in the derivation of the method above, not only is A ′ − vwT/ ak 1
multiplied by P ′, but so is v / ak 1 .) Finally , the Schur complement is
computed by lines 15–18 in much the same way as it is computed by lines
6–1 1 of LU-D ECOMPOSITION , except that here the operation is written to
work in place.
Page number: 977
Figur e 28.2  The operation of LUP-D ECOMPOSITION . (a)  The input matrix A  with the identity
permutation of the rows in yellow on the left. The first step of the algorithm determines that the
element 5 highlighted in blue in the third row is the pivot for the first column. (b)  Rows 1 and 3 are
swapped and the permutation is updated. The tan column and row represent v  and wT. (c)  The vector
v  is replaced by v /5, and the lower right of the matrix is updated with the Schur complement. Lines
divide the matrix into three regions: elements of U  (above), elements of L  (left), and elements of the
Schur complement (lower right). (d)–(f)  The second step. (g)–(i)  The third step. No further changes
occur on the fourth (final) step. (j)  The LUP decomposition P A  = LU .
Because of its triply nested loop structure, LUP-D ECOMPOSITION  has a
running time of Θ( n3), which is the same as that of LU-D ECOMPOSITION .
Thus, pivoting costs at most a constant factor in time.
Exer cises
28.1-1
Solve the equation

Page number: 978
by using forward substitution.
28.1-2
Find an LU decomposition of the matrix
28.1-3
Solve the equation
by using an LUP decomposition.
28.1-4
Describe the LUP decomposition of a diagonal matrix.
28.1-5
Describe the LUP decomposition of a permutation matrix, and prove that it
is unique.
28.1-6
Show that for all n  ≥ 1, there exists a singular n  × n  matrix that has an LU
decomposition.
28.1-7
In LU-D ECOMPOSITION , is it necessary to perform the outermost for  loop
iteration when k  = n ? How about in LUP-D ECOMPOSITION ?
28.2    Inverting matrices
Although you can use equation (28.3) to solve a system of linear equations
by computing a matrix inverse, in practice you are better of f using more
numerically stable techniques, such as LUP decomposition. Sometimes,
however , you really do need to compute a matrix inverse. This section
shows how to use LUP decomposition to compute a matrix inverse. It also
proves that matrix multiplication and computing the inverse of a matrix are
Page number: 979
equivalently hard problems, in that (subject to technical conditions) an
algorithm for one can solve the other in the same asymptotic running time.
Thus, you can use Strassen’ s algorithm (see Section 4.2 ) for matrix
multiplication to invert a matrix. Indeed, Strassen’ s original paper was
motivated by the idea that a set of a linear equations could be solved more
quickly than by the usual method.
Computing a matrix inverse fr om an LUP decomposition
Suppose that you have an LUP decomposition of a matrix A  in the form of
three matrices L , U , and P  such that P A  = LU . Using LUP-S OL VE , you can
solve an equation of the form Ax  = b  in Θ( n2) time. Since the LUP
decomposition depends on A  but not b , you can run LUP-S OL VE  on a second
set of equations of the form Ax  = b ′ in Θ( n2) additional time. In general,
once you have the LUP decomposition of A , you can solve, in Θ( kn2) time,
k  versions of the equation Ax  = b  that dif fer only in the vector b .
Let’ s think of the equation
which defines the matrix X , the inverse of A , as a set of n  distinct equations
of the form Ax  = b . T o be precise, let Xi  denote the i th column of X , and
recall that the unit vector ei  is the i th column of In . Y ou can then solve
equation (28.1 1) for X  by using the LUP decomposition for A  to solve each
equation
AXi  = ei
separately for Xi . Once you have the LUP decomposition, you can compute
each of the n  columns Xi  in Θ( n2) time, and so you can compute X  from the
LUP decomposition of A  in Θ( n3) time. Since you find the LUP
decomposition of A  in Θ( n3) time, you can compute the inverse A−1 of a
matrix A  in Θ( n3) time.
Matrix multiplication and matrix inversion
Now let’ s see how the theoretical speedups obtained for matrix
multiplication translate to speedups for matrix inversion. In fact, we’ll
prove something stronger: matrix inversion is equivalent to matrix
Page number: 980
multiplication, in the following sense. If M ( n ) denotes the time to multiply
two n  × n  matrices, then a nonsingular n  × n  matrix can be inverted in
O ( M ( n )) time. Moreover , if I ( n ) denotes the time to invert a nonsingular n  ×
n  matrix, then two n  × n  matrices can be multiplied in O ( I ( n )) time. W e
prove these results as two separate theorems.
Theorem 28.1 (Multiplication is no harder than inversion)
If an n  × n  matrix can be inverted in I ( n ) time, where I ( n ) = Ω( n2) and I ( n )
satisfies the regularity condition I (3 n ) = O ( I ( n )), then two n  × n  matrices
can be multiplied in O ( I ( n )) time.
Proof    Let A  and B  be n  × n  matrices. T o compute their product C  = AB ,
define the 3 n  × 3 n  matrix D  by
The inverse of D  is
and thus to compute the product AB , just take the upper right n  × n
submatrix of D−1.
Constructing matrix D  takes Θ( n2) time, which is O ( I ( n )) from the
assumption that I ( n ) = Ω( n2), and inverting D  takes O ( I (3 n )) = O ( I ( n )) time,
by the regularity condition on I ( n ). W e thus have M ( n ) = O ( I ( n )).
▪
Note that I ( n ) satisfies the regularity condition whenever I ( n ) = Θ( nc
lgdn ) for any constants c  > 0 and d  ≥ 0.
The proof that matrix inversion is no harder than matrix multiplication
relies on some properties of symmetric positive-definite matrices proved in
Section 28.3 .
Theorem 28.2 (Inversion is no harder than multiplication)
Suppose that two n  × n  real matrices can be multiplied in M ( n ) time, where
M ( n ) = Ω( n2) and M ( n ) satisfies the following two regularity conditions:
1 . M ( n  + k ) = O ( M ( n )) for any k  in the range 0 ≤ k  < n , and
Page number: 981
2 . M ( n /2) ≤ cM ( n ) for some constant c  < 1/2.
Then the inverse of any real nonsingular n × n  matrix can be computed in
O ( M ( n )) time.
Proof    Let A  be an n  × n  matrix with real-valued entries that is nonsingular .
Assume that n  is an exact power of 2 (i.e., n  = 2l for some integer l ); we’ll
see at the end of the proof what to do if n  is not an exact power of 2.
For the moment, assume that the n  × n  matrix A  is symmetric and
positive-definite. Partition each of A  and its inverse A−1 into four n /2 × n /2
submatrices:
Then, if we let
be the Schur complement of A  with respect to B  (we’ll see more about this
form of Schur complement in Section 28.3 ), we have
since AA−1 = In , as you can verify by performing the matrix multiplication.
Because A  is symmetric and positive-definite, Lemmas 28.4 and 28.5 in
Section 28.3  imply that B  and S  are both symmetric and positive-definite.
By Lemma 28.3 in Section 28.3 , therefore, the inverses B−1 and S−1 exist,
and by Exercise D.2-6 on page 1223, B−1 and S−1 are symmetric, so that
( B−1)T = B−1 and ( S−1)T = S−1. Therefore, to compute the submatrices
R =B−1 + B−1CTS−1CB−1,
T =− B−1CTS−1,
U =− S−1CB−1, and
V =S−1
of A−1, do the following, where all matrices mentioned are n /2 × n /2:
1 . Form the submatrices B , C , CT, and D  of A .
2 . Recursively compute the inverse B−1 of B .
Page number: 982
3 . Compute the matrix product W  = CB−1, and then compute its
transpose WT, which equals B−1CT (by Exercise D.1-2 on page 1219
and ( B−1)T = B−1).
4 . Compute the matrix product X  = WCT, which equals CB−1CT, and
then compute the matrix S  = D  − X  = D  − CB−1CT.
5 . Recursively compute the inverse S−1 of S .
6 . Compute the matrix product Y  = S−1W , which equals S−1CB−1, and
then compute its transpose YT, which equals B−1CTS−1 (by Exercise
D.1-2, ( B−1)T = B−1, and ( S−1)T = S−1).
7 . Compute the matrix product Z  = WTY , which equals B−1CTS−1CB−1.
8 . Set R  = B−1 + Z .
9 . Set T  = − YT.
10 . Set U  = − Y .
1 1 . Set V  = S−1.
Thus, to invert an n × n  symmetric positive-definite matrix, invert two
n /2× n /2 matrices in steps 2 and 5; perform four multiplications of n /2 × n /2
matrices in steps 3, 4, 6, and 7; plus incur an additional cost of O ( n2) for
extracting submatrices from A , inserting submatrices into A−1, and
performing a constant number of additions, subtractions, and transposes on
n /2 × n /2 matrices. The running time is given by the recurrence
The second line follows from the assumption that M ( n ) = Ω( n2) and from
the second regularity condition in the statement of the theorem, which
implies that 4 M ( n /2) < 2 M ( n ). Because M ( n ) = Ω( n2), case 3 of the master
theorem (Theorem 4.1) applies to the recurrence (28.15), giving the
O ( M ( n )) result.
It remains to prove how to obtain the same asymptotic running time for
matrix multiplication as for matrix inversion when A  is invertible but not
symmetric and positive-definite. The basic idea is that for any nonsingular
matrix A , the matrix ATA  is symmetric (by Exercise D.1-2) and positive-
Page number: 983
definite (by Theorem D.6 on page 1222). The trick, then, is to reduce the
problem of inverting A  to the problem of inverting ATA .
The reduction is based on the observation that when A  is an n  × n
nonsingular matrix, we have
A−1 = ( ATA )−1AT,
since (( ATA )−1AT) A  = ( ATA )−1( ATA ) = In  and a matrix inverse is unique.
Therefore, to compute A−1, first multiply AT by A  to obtain ATA , then invert
the symmetric positive-definite matrix ATA  using the above divide-and-
conquer algorithm, and finally multiply the result by AT. Each of these three
steps takes O ( M ( n )) time, and thus any nonsingular matrix with real entries
can be inverted in O ( M ( n )) time.
The above proof assumed that A  is an n  × n  matrix, where n  is an exact
power of 2. If n  is not an exact power of 2, then let k  < n  be such that n  + k
is an exact power of 2, and define the ( n  + k ) × ( n  + k ) matrix A ′ as
Then the inverse of A ′ is
Apply the method of the proof to A ′ to compute the inverse of A ′, and take
the first n  rows and n  columns of the result as the desired answer A−1. The
first regularity condition on M ( n ) ensures that enlar ging the matrix in this
way increases the running time by at most a constant factor .
▪
The proof of Theorem 28.2 suggests how to solve the equation Ax  = b  by
using LU decomposition without pivoting, so long as A  is nonsingular . Let y
= ATb . Multiply both sides of the equation Ax  = b  by AT, yielding ( ATA ) x  =
ATb  = y . This transformation doesn’ t af fect the solution x , since AT is
invertible. Because ATA  is symmetric positive-definite, it can be factored by
computing an LU decomposition. Then, use forward and back substitution
to solve for x  in the equation ( ATA ) x  = y . Although this method is
theoretically correct, in practice the procedure LUP-D ECOMPOSITION  works
Page number: 984
much better . LUP decomposition requires fewer arithmetic operations by a
constant factor , and it has somewhat better numerical properties.
Exer cises
28.2-1
Let M ( n ) be the time to multiply two n  × n  matrices, and let S ( n ) denote the
time required to square an n  × n  matrix. Show that multiplying and squaring
matrices have essentially the same dif ficulty: an M ( n )-time matrix-
multiplication algorithm implies an O ( M ( n ))-time squaring algorithm, and
an S ( n )-time squaring algorithm implies an O ( S ( n ))-time matrix-
multiplication algorithm.
28.2-2
Let M ( n ) be the time to multiply two n  × n  matrices. Show that an M ( n )-
time matrix-multiplication algorithm implies an O ( M ( n ))-time LUP-
decomposition algorithm. (The LUP decomposition your method produces
need not be the same as the result produced by the LUP-D ECOMPOSITION
procedure.)
28.2-3
Let M ( n ) be the time to multiply two n  × n  boolean matrices, and let T ( n ) be
the time to find the transitive closure of an n  × n  boolean matrix. (See
Section 23.2 .) Show that an M ( n )-time boolean matrix-multiplication
algorithm implies an O ( M ( n ) lg n )-time transitive-closure algorithm, and a
T ( n )-time transitive-closure algorithm implies an O ( T  ( n ))-time boolean
matrix-multiplication algorithm.
28.2-4
Does the matrix-inversion algorithm based on Theorem 28.2 work when
matrix elements are drawn from the field of integers modulo 2? Explain.
★  28.2-5
Generalize the matrix-inversion algorithm of Theorem 28.2 to handle
matrices of complex numbers, and prove that your generalization works
correctly . ( Hint:  Instead of the transpose of A , use the conjugate
transpose  A *, which you obtain from the transpose of A  by replacing every
entry with its complex conjugate. Instead of symmetric matrices, consider
Hermitian  matrices, which are matrices A  such that A  = A *.)
Page number: 985
28.3    Symmetric positive-definite matrices and least-squar es
appr oximation
Symmetric positive-definite matrices have many interesting and desirable
properties. An n  × n  matrix A  is symmetric positive-definite  if A  = AT( A  is
symmetric) and xTAx  > 0 for all n -vectors x  ≠ 0 ( A  is positive-definite).
Symmetric positive-definite matrices are nonsingular , and an LU
decomposition on them will not divide by 0. This section proves these and
several other important properties of symmetric positive-definite matrices.
W e’ll also see an interesting application to curve fitting by a least-squares
approximation.
The first property we prove is perhaps the most basic.
Lemma 28.3
Any positive-definite matrix is nonsingular .
Proof    Suppose that a matrix A  is singular . Then by Corollary D.3 on page
1221, there exists a nonzero vector x  such that Ax  = 0. Hence, xTAx  = 0, and
A  cannot be positive-definite.
▪
The proof that an LU decomposition on a symmetric positive-definite
matrix A  won’ t divide by 0 is more involved. W e begin by proving
properties about certain submatrices of A . Define the k th leading submatrix
of A  to be the matrix Ak  consisting of the intersection of the first k  rows and
first k  columns of A .
Lemma 28.4
If A  is a symmetric positive-definite matrix, then every leading submatrix of
A  is symmetric and positive-definite.
Proof    Since A  is symmetric, each leading submatrix Ak  is also symmetric.
W e’ll prove that Ak  is positive-definite by contradiction. If Ak  is not
positive-definite, then there exists a k -vector xk  ≠ 0 such that 
 . Let
A  be n  × n , and

Page number: 986
for submatrices B  (which is ( n − k )× k ) and C  (which is ( n − k )×( n − k )). Define
the n -vector 
 , where n  − k  0s follow xk . Then we have
which contradicts A  being positive-definite.
▪
W e now turn to some essential properties of the Schur complement. Let
A  be a symmetric positive-definite matrix, and let Ak  be a leading k  × k
submatrix of A . Partition A  once again according to equation (28.16).
Equation (28.10) generalizes to define the Schur complement  S  of A  with
respect to Ak  as
(By Lemma 28.4, Ak  is symmetric and positive-definite, and therefore, 
exists by Lemma 28.3, and S  is well defined.) The earlier definition (28.10)
of the Schur complement is consistent with equation (28.17) by letting k  =
1.
The next lemma shows that the Schur -complement matrices of
symmetric positive-definite matrices are themselves symmetric and
positive-definite. W e used this result in Theorem 28.2, and its corollary will
help prove that LU decomposition works for symmetric positive-definite
matrices.
Lemma 28.5 (Schur complement lemma)
If A  is a symmetric positive-definite matrix and Ak  is a leading k  × k
submatrix of A , then the Schur complement S  of A  with respect to Ak  is
symmetric and positive-definite.
Proof    Because A  is symmetric, so is the submatrix C . By Exercise D.2-6
on page 1223, the product 
  is symmetric. Since C  and 
  are
symmetric, then by Exercise D.1-1 on page 1219, so is S .
Page number: 987
It remains to show that S  is positive-definite. Consider the partition of A
given in equation (28.16). For any nonzero vector x , we have xTAx  > 0 by
the assumption that A  is positive-definite. Let the subvectors y  and z  consist
of the first k  and last n  − k  elements in x , respectively , and thus they are
compatible with Ak  and C , respectively . Because 
  exists, we have
This last equation, which you can verify by multiplying through, amounts to
“completing the square” of the quadratic form. (See Exercise 28.3-2.)
Since xTAx  > 0 holds for any nonzero x , pick any nonzero z  and then
choose 
 , which causes the first term in equation (28.18) to vanish,
leaving
as the value of the expression. For any z  ≠ 0, we therefore have zTSz  = xTAx
> 0, and thus S  is positive-definite.
▪
Corollary 28.6
LU decomposition of a symmetric positive-definite matrix never causes a
division by 0.
Proof    Let A  be an n  × n  symmetric positive-definite matrix. In fact, we’ll
prove a stronger result than the statement of the corollary: every pivot is
strictly positive. The first pivot is a1 1 . Let e1  be the length- n  unit vector ( 1
0 0 ⋯  0 )T, so that 
 , which is positive because e1  is nonzero and A
is positive definite. Since the first step of LU decomposition produces the
Schur complement of A  with respect to A1  = ( a1 1 ), Lemma 28.5 implies by
induction that all pivots are positive.
▪
Least-squar es appr oximation
Page number: 988
One important application of symmetric positive-definite matrices arises in
fitting curves to given sets of data points. Y ou are given a set of m  data
points
( x1 , y1 ), ( x2 , y2 ), … , ( xm , ym ),
where you know that the yi  are subject to measurement errors. Y ou wish to
determine a function F ( x ) such that the approximation errors
are small for i  = 1, 2, … , m . The form of the function F  depends on the
problem at hand. Let’ s assume that it has the form of a linearly weighted
sum
where the number n  of summands and the specific basis functions  fj  are
chosen based on knowledge of the problem at hand. A common choice is
fj ( x ) = xj −1, which means that
F ( x ) = c1  + c2 x  + c3 x2 + ⋯  + cn xn −1
is a polynomial of degree n  − 1 in x . Thus, if you are given m  data points
( x1 , y1 ), ( x2 , y2 ), … , ( xm , ym ), you need to calculate n  coef ficients c1 , c2 , … ,
cn  that minimize the approximation errors η1 , η2 , … , ηm .
By choosing n  = m , you can calculate each yi  exactly  in equation
(28.19). Such a high-degree polynomial F  “fits the noise” as well as the
data, however , and generally gives poor results when used to predict y  for
previously unseen values of x . It is usually better to choose n  significantly
smaller than m  and hope that by choosing the coef ficients cj  well, you can
obtain a function F  that finds the significant patterns in the data points
without paying undue attention to the noise. Some theoretical principles
exist for choosing n , but they are beyond the scope of this text. In any case,
once you choose a value of n  that is less than m , you end up with an
overdetermined set of equations whose solution you wish to approximate.
Let’ s see how to do so.
Let
Page number: 989
denote the matrix of values of the basis functions at the given points, that is,
aij  = fj ( xi ). Let c  = ( ck ) denote the desired n -vector of coef ficients. Then,
is the m -vector of “predicted values” for y . Thus,
η  = Ac  − y
is the m -vector of approximation errors .
T o minimize approximation errors, let’ s minimize the norm of the error
vector η , which gives a least-squares solution , since
Because
to minimize ∥ η ∥ , dif ferentiate ∥ η ∥2 with respect to each ck  and then set the
result to 0:
The n  equations (28.20) for k  = 1, 2, … , n  are equivalent to the single
matrix equation
( Ac  − y )T A  = 0
or , equivalently (using Exercise D.1-2 on page 1219), to
Page number: 990
AT( Ac  − y ) = 0,
which implies
In statistics, equation (28.21) is called the normal equation . The matrix
ATA  is symmetric by Exercise D.1-2, and if A  has full column rank, then by
Theorem D.6 on page 1222, ATA  is positive-definite as well. Hence, ( ATA )
−1 exists, and the solution to equation (28.21) is
where the matrix A+ = (( ATA )−1AT) is the pseudoinverse  of the matrix A .
The pseudoinverse naturally generalizes the notion of a matrix inverse to
the case in which A  is not square. (Compare equation (28.22) as the
approximate solution to Ac  = y  with the solution A−1b  as the exact solution
to Ax  = b .)
As an example of producing a least-squares fit, suppose that you have
five data points
( x 1 , y 1 ) = (−1, 2),
( x 2 , y 2 ) = (1, 1),
( x 3 , y 3 ) = (2, 1),
( x 4 , y 4 ) = (3, 0),
( x 5 , y 5 ) = (5, 3),
shown as orange dots in Figure 28.3 , and you want to fit these points with a
quadratic polynomial
F ( x ) = c1  + c2 x  + c3 x2.
Start with the matrix of basis-function values
whose pseudoinverse is
Page number: 991
Figur e 28.3  The least-squares fit of a quadratic polynomial to the set of five data points {(−1, 2), (1,
1), (2, 1), (3, 0), (5, 3)}. The orange dots are the data points, and the blue dots are their estimated
values predicted by the polynomial F ( x ) = 1.2 − 0.757 x  + 0.214 x2, the quadratic polynomial that
minimizes the sum of the squared errors, plotted in blue. Each orange line shows the error for one
data point.
Multiplying y  by A+ gives the coef ficient vector
which corresponds to the quadratic polynomial
F ( x ) = 1.200 − 0.757 x  + 0.214 x2
as the closest-fitting quadratic to the given data, in a least-squares sense.
As a practical matter , you would typically solve the normal equation
(28.21) by multiplying y  by AT and then finding an LU decomposition of
ATA . If A  has full rank, the matrix ATA  is guaranteed to be nonsingular ,
because it is symmetric and positive-definite. (See Exercise D.1-2 and
Theorem D.6.)
Page number: 992
Figur e 28.4  A least-squares fit of a curve of the form
c 1  + c 2 x  + c 3 x2 + c 4  sin(2 πx ) + c 5  cos(2 πx )
for the carbon-dioxide concentrations measured in Mauna Loa, Hawaii from 19901 to 2019, where x
is the number of years elapsed since 1990. This curve is the famous “Keeling curve,” illustrating
curve-fitting to nonpolynomial formulas. The sine and cosine terms allow modeling of seasonal
variations in CO 2  concentrations. The red curve shows the measured CO 2  concentrations. The best
fit, shown in black, has the form
352.83 + 1.39 x  + 0.02 x2 + 2.83 sin(2 πx ) − 0.94 cos(2 πx ).
W e close this section with an example in Figure 28.4 , illustrating that a
curve can also fit a nonpolynomial function. The curve confirms one aspect
of climate change: that carbon dioxide (CO2 ) concentrations have steadily
increased over a period of 29 years. Linear and quadratic terms model the
annual increase, and sine and cosine terms model seasonal variations.
Exer cises
28.3-1
Prove that every diagonal element of a symmetric positive-definite matrix is
positive.
Page number: 993
28.3-2
Let 
  be a 2 × 2 symmetric positive-definite matrix. Prove that its
determinant ac  − b2 is positive by “completing the square” in a manner
similar to that used in the proof of Lemma 28.5.
28.3-3
Prove that the maximum element in a symmetric positive-definite matrix
lies on the diagonal.
28.3-4
Prove that the determinant of each leading submatrix of a symmetric
positive-definite matrix is positive.
28.3-5
Let Ak  denote the k th leading submatrix of a symmetric positive-definite
matrix A . Prove that det( Ak )/det( Ak −1 ) is the k th pivot during LU
decomposition, where, by convention, det( A0 ) = 1.
28.3-6
Find the function of the form
F ( x ) = c1  + c2 x  lg x  + c3 ex
that is the best least-squares fit to the data points
(1, 1), (2, 1), (3, 3), (4, 8).
28.3-7
Show that the pseudoinverse A+ satisfies the following four equations:
AA+A= A ,
A+AA+ =A+,
( AA+)T =AA+,
( A+A )T =A+A .
Pr oblems
28-1     T ridiagonal systems of linear equations
Page number: 994
Consider the tridiagonal matrix
a.  Find an LU decomposition of A .
b.  Solve the equation Ax  = ( 1 1 1 1 1 )T by using forward and back
substitution.
c.  Find the inverse of A .
d.  Show how to solve the equation Ax  = b  for any n  × n  symmetric positive-
definite, tridiagonal matrix A  and any n -vector b  in O ( n ) time by
performing an LU decomposition. Ar gue that any method based on
forming A−1 is asymptotically more expensive in the worst case.
e.  Show how to solve the equation Ax  = b  for any n  × n  nonsingular ,
tridiagonal matrix A  and any n -vector b  in O ( n ) time by performing an
LUP decomposition.
28-2     Splines
A practical method for interpolating a set of points with a curve is to use
cubic splines . Y ou are given a set {( xi , yi ) : i  = 0, 1, … , n } of n  + 1 point-
value pairs, where x0  < x1  < ⋯  < xn . Y our goal is to fit a piecewise-cubic
curve (spline) f ( x ) to the points. That is, the curve f ( x ) is made up of n  cubic
polynomials fi ( x ) = ai  + bi x  + ci x2 + di x3 for i  = 0, 1, … , n  − 1, where if x
falls in the range xi  ≤ x  ≤ xi +1 , then the value of the curve is given by f ( x ) =
fi ( x  − xi ). The points xi  at which the cubic polynomials are “pasted” together
are called knots . For simplicity , assume that xi  = i  for i  = 0, 1, … , n .
T o ensure continuity of f ( x ), require that
f ( x i ) = f i (0) = y i ,
f ( x i +1 ) = f i (1) = y i +1
for i  = 0, 1, … , n  − 1. T o ensure that f ( x ) is suf ficiently smooth, also require
the first derivative to be continuous at each knot:
Page number: 995
for i  = 0, 1, … , n  − 2.
a.  Suppose that for i  = 0, 1, … , n , in addition to the point-value pairs {( xi ,
yi )}, you are also given the first derivative Di  = f ′( xi ) at each knot. Express
each coef ficient ai , bi , ci , and di  in terms of the values yi , yi +1 , Di , and
Di +1 . (Remember that xi  = i .) How quickly can you compute the 4 n
coef ficients from the point-value pairs and first derivatives?
The question remains of how to choose the first derivatives of f ( x ) at the
knots. One method is to require the second derivatives to be continuous at
the knots:
for i  = 0, 1, … , n −2. At the first and last knots, assume that 
and 
 . These assumptions make f ( x ) a natural  cubic spline.
b.  Use the continuity constraints on the second derivative to show that for i
= 1, 2, … , n  − 1,
c.  Show that
d.  Rewrite equations (28.23)–(28.25) as a matrix equation involving the
vector D  = ( D0  D1  D2  ⋯  Dn )T of unknowns. What attributes does the
matrix in your equation have?
e.  Ar gue that a natural cubic spline can interpolate a set of n  + 1 point-value
pairs in O ( n ) time (see Problem 28-1).
f.  Show how to determine a natural cubic spline that interpolates a set of n  +
1 points ( xi , yi ) satisfying x0  < x1  < ⋯  < xn , even when xi  is not
necessarily equal to i . What matrix equation must your method solve, and
how quickly does your algorithm run?
Chapter notes
Page number: 996
Many excellent texts describe numerical and scientific computation in much
greater detail than we have room for here. The following are especially
readable: Geor ge and Liu [ 180 ], Golub and V an Loan [ 192 ], Press,
T eukolsky , V etterling, and Flannery [ 365 , 366 ], and Strang [ 422 , 423 ].
Golub and V an Loan [ 192 ] discuss numerical stability . They show why
det( A ) is not necessarily a good indicator of the stability of a matrix A ,
proposing instead to use ∥ A ∥∞  ∥ A−1∥∞ , where 
 .
They also address the question of how to compute this value without
actually computing A−1.
Gaussian elimination, upon which the LU and LUP decompositions are
based, was the first systematic method for solving linear systems of
equations. It was also one of the earliest numerical algorithms. Although it
was known earlier , its discovery is commonly attributed to C. F . Gauss
(1777–1855). In his famous paper [ 424 ], Strassen showed that an n × n
matrix can be inverted in O ( nlg 7) time. W inograd [ 460 ] originally proved
that matrix multiplication is no harder than matrix inversion, and the
converse is due to Aho, Hopcroft, and Ullman [ 5 ].
Another important matrix decomposition is the singular value
decomposition , or SVD . The SVD factors an m  × n  matrix A  into 
 ,
where Σ is an m × n  matrix with nonzero values only on the diagonal, Q1  is
m × m  with mutually orthonormal columns, and Q2  is n  × n , also with
mutually orthonormal columns. T wo vectors are orthonormal  if their inner
product is 0 and each vector has a norm of 1. The books by Strang [ 422 ,
423 ] and Golub and V an Loan [ 192 ] contain good treatments of the SVD.
Strang [ 423 ] has an excellent presentation of symmetric positive-definite
matrices and of linear algebra in general.
1 The year in which Intr oduction to Algorithms  was first published.
Page number: 997
29        Linear Pr ogramming
Many problems take the form of maximizing or minimizing an objective,
given limited resources and competing constraints. If you can specify the
objective as a linear function of certain variables, and if you can specify the
constraints on resources as equalities or inequalities on those variables, then
you have a linear-programming problem . Linear programs arise in a
variety of practical applications. W e begin by studying an application in
electoral politics.
A political pr oblem
Suppose that you are a politician trying to win an election. Y our district has
three dif ferent types of areas—urban, suburban, and rural. These areas have,
respectively , 100,000, 200,000, and 50,000 registered voters. Although not
all the registered voters actually go to the polls, you decide that to govern
ef fectively , you would like at least half the registered voters in each of the
three regions to vote for you. Y ou are honorable and would never consider
supporting policies you don’ t believe in. Y ou realize, however , that certain
issues may be more ef fective in winning votes in certain places. Y our
primary issues are preparing for a zombie apocalypse, equipping sharks
with lasers, building highways for flying cars, and allowing dolphins to
vote.
According to your campaign staf f ’ s research, you can estimate how
many votes you win or lose from each population segment by spending
$1,000 on advertising on each issue. This information appears in the table
of Figure 29.1 . In this table, each entry indicates the number of thousands
of either urban, suburban, or rural voters who would be won over by
spending $1,000 on advertising in support of a particular issue. Negative
Page number: 998
entries denote votes that would be lost. Y our task is to figure out the
minimum amount of money that you need to spend in order to win 50,000
urban votes, 100,000 suburban votes, and 25,000 rural votes.
Y ou could, by trial and error , devise a strategy that wins the required
number of votes, but the strategy you come up with might not be the least
expensive one. For example, you could devote $20,000 of advertising to
preparing for a zombie apocalypse, $0 to equipping sharks with lasers,
$4,000 to building highways for flying cars, and $9,000 to allowing
dolphins to vote. In this case, you would win (20 · −2) + (0 · 8) + (4 · 0) + (9
· 10) = 50 thousand urban votes, (20 · 5) + (0 · 2) + (4 · 0) + (9 · 0) = 100
thousand suburban votes, and (20 · 3) + (0 · −5) + (4 · 10) + (9 · −2) = 82
thousand rural votes. Y ou would win the exact number of votes desired in
the urban and suburban areas and more than enough votes in the rural area.
(In fact, according to your model, in the rural area you would receive more
votes than there are voters.) In order to garner these votes, you would have
paid for 20 + 0 + 4 + 9 = 33 thousand dollars of advertising.
Figur e 29.1  The ef fects of policies on voters. Each entry describes the number of thousands of urban,
suburban, or rural voters who could be won over by spending $1,000 on advertising support of a
policy on a particular issue. Negative entries denote votes that would be lost.
It’ s natural to wonder whether this strategy is the best possible. That is,
can you achieve your goals while spending less on advertising? Additional
trial and error might help you to answer this question, but a better approach
is to formulate (or model ) this question mathematically .
The first step is to decide what decisions you have to make and to
introduce variables that capture these decisions. Since you have four
decisions, you introduce four decision variables :
x1  is the number of thousands of dollars spent on advertising on
preparing for a zombie apocalypse,
x2  is the number of thousands of dollars spent on advertising on
equipping sharks with lasers,
Page number: 999
x3  is the number of thousands of dollars spent on advertising on
building highways for flying cars, and
x4  is the number of thousands of dollars spent on advertising on
allowing dolphins to vote.
Y ou then think about constraints , which are limits, or restrictions, on the
values that the decision variables can take. Y ou can write the requirement
that you win at least 50,000 urban votes as
Similarly , you can write the requirements that you win at least 100,000
suburban votes and 25,000 rural votes as
and
Any setting of the variables x1 , x2 , x3 , x4  that satisfies inequalities (29.1)–
(29.3) yields a strategy that wins a suf ficient number of each type of vote.
Finally , you think about your objective , which is the quantity that you
wish to either minimize or maximize. In order to keep costs as small as
possible, you would like to minimize the amount spent on advertising. That
is, you want to minimize the expression
Although negative advertising often occurs in political campaigns, there is
no such thing as negative-cost advertising. Consequently , you require that
Combining inequalities (29.1)–(29.3) and (29.5) with the objective of
minimizing (29.4) produces what is known as a “linear program.” W e can
format this problem tabularly as
subject to
Page number: 1000
The solution to this linear program yields your optimal strategy .
The remainder of this chapter covers how to formulate linear programs
and is an introduction to modeling in general. Modeling refers to the
general process of converting a problem into a mathematical form amenable
to solution by an algorithm. Section 29.1  discusses briefly the algorithmic
aspects of linear programming, although it does not include the details of a
linear -programming algorithm. Throughout this book, we have seen ways to
model problems, such as by shortest paths and connectivity in a graph.
When modeling a problem as a linear program, you go through the steps
used in this political example—identifying the decision variables,
specifying the constraints, and formulating the objective function. In order
to model a problem as a linear program, the constraints and objectives must
be linear . In Section 29.2 , we will see several other examples of modeling
via linear programs. Section 29.3  discusses duality , an important concept in
linear programming and other optimization algorithms.
29.1    Linear pr ogramming formulations and algorithms
Linear programs take a particular form, which we will examine in this
section. Multiple algorithms have been developed to solve linear programs.
Some run in polynomial time, some do not, but they are all too complicated
to show here. Instead, we will give an example that demonstrates some
ideas behind the simplex algorithm, which is currently the most commonly
deployed solution method.
General linear pr ograms
In the general linear -programming problem, we wish to optimize a linear
function subject to a set of linear inequalities. Given a set of real numbers
a1 , a2 , … , an  and a set of variables x1 , x2 , … , xn , we define a linear
function  f  on those variables by

Page number: 1001
If b  is a real number and f  is a linear function, then the equation
f ( x1 , x2 , … , xn ) = b
is a linear equality  and the inequalities
f ( x1 , x2 , … , xn ) ≤ b  and f ( x1 , x2 , … , xn ) ≥ b
are linear inequalities . W e use the general term linear constraints  to denote
either linear equalities or linear inequalities. Linear programming does not
allow strict inequalities. Formally , a linear-programming problem  is the
problem of either minimizing or maximizing a linear function subject to a
finite set of linear constraints. If minimizing, we call the linear program a
minimization linear program , and if maximizing, we call the linear
program a maximization linear program .
In order to discuss linear -programming algorithms and properties, it will
be helpful to use a standard notation for the input. By convention, a
maximization linear program takes as input n  real numbers c1 , c2 , … , cn ; m
real numbers b1 , b2 , … , bm ; and mn  real numbers aij  for i  = 1, 2, … , m  and
j  = 1, 2, … , n .
The goal is to find n  real numbers x1 , x2 , … , xn  that
subject to
W e call expression (29.1 1) the objective function  and the n  + m  inequalities
in lines (29.12) and (29.13) the constraints . The n  constraints in line
(29.13) are the nonnegativity constraints . It can sometimes be more
convenient to express a linear program in a more compact form. If we
create an m  × n  matrix A  = ( aij ), an m -vector b  = ( bi ), an n -vector c  = ( cj ),
and an n -vector x  = ( xj ), then we can rewrite the linear program defined in
(29.1 1)–(29.13) as
subject to
Page number: 1002
In line (29.14), cTx  is the inner product of two n -vectors. In inequality
(29.15), Ax  is the m -vector that is the product of an m  × n  matrix and an n -
vector , and in inequality (29.16), x  ≥ 0 means that each entry of the vector x
must be nonnegative. W e call this representation the standard form  for a
linear program, and we adopt the convention that A , b , and c  always have
the dimensions given above.
The standard form above may not naturally correspond to real-life
situations you are trying to model. For example, you might have equality
constraints or variables that can take on negative values. Exercises 29.1-6
and 29.1-7 ask you to show how to convert any linear program into this
standard form.
W e now introduce terminology to describe solutions to linear programs.
W e denote a particular setting of the values in a variable, say x , by putting a
bar over the variable name: x . If x  satisfies all the constraints, then it is a
feasible solution , but if it fails to satisfy at least one constraint, then it is an
infeasible solution . W e say that a solution x  has objective value  cTx . A
feasible solution x  whose objective value is maximum over all feasible
solutions is an optimal solution , and we call its objective value cTx  the
optimal objective value . If a linear program has no feasible solutions, we
say that the linear program is infeasible , and otherwise, it is feasible . The
set of points that satisfy all the constraints is the feasible region . If a linear
program has some feasible solutions but does not have a finite optimal
objective value, then the feasible region is unbounded  and so is the linear
program. Exercise 29.1-5 asks you to show that a linear program can have a
finite optimal objective value even if the feasible region is unbounded.
One of the reasons for the power and popularity of linear programming
is that linear programs can, in general, be solved ef ficiently . There are two
classes of algorithms, known as ellipsoid algorithms and interior -point
algorithms, that solve linear programs in polynomial time. In addition, the
simplex algorithm is widely used. Although it does not run in polynomial
time in the worst case, it tends to perform well in practice.
W e will not give a detailed algorithm for linear programming, but will
discuss a few important ideas. First, we will give an example of using a
geometric procedure to solve a two-variable linear program. Although this
example does not immediately generalize to an ef ficient algorithm for lar ger
Page number: 1003
problems, it introduces some important concepts for linear programming
and for optimization in general.
A two-variable linear pr ogram
Let us first consider the following linear program with two variables:
subject to
Figure 29.2(a)  graphs the constraints in the ( x1 , x2 )-Cartesian coordinate
system. The feasible region in the two-dimensional space (highlighted in
blue in the figure) is convex.1 Conceptually , you could evaluate the
objective function x1  + x2  at each point in the feasible region, and then
identify a point that has the maximum objective value as an optimal
solution. For this example (and for most linear programs), however , the
feasible region contains an infinite number of points, and so to solve this
linear program, you need an ef ficient way to find a point that achieves the
maximum objective value without explicitly evaluating the objective
function at every point in the feasible region.
In two dimensions, you can optimize via a graphical procedure. The set
of points for which x1  + x2  = z , for any z , is a line with a slope of −1.
Plotting x1  + x2  = 0 produces the line with slope −1 through the origin, as in
Figure 29.2(b) . The intersection of this line and the feasible region is the set
of feasible solutions that have an objective value of 0. In this case, that
intersection of the line with the feasible region is the single point (0, 0).
More generally , for any value z , the intersection of the line x1  + x2  = z  and
the feasible region is the set of feasible solutions that have objective value
z . Figure 29.2(b)  shows the lines x1  + x2  = 0, x1  + x2  = 4, and x1  + x2  = 8.
Because the feasible region in Figure 29.2  is bounded, there must be some
maximum value z  for which the intersection of the line x1  + x2  = z  and the
feasible region is nonempty . Any point in the feasible region that
maximizes x1  + x2  is an optimal solution to the linear program, which in this
Page number: 1004
case is the vertex of the feasible region at x1  = 2 and x2  = 6, with objective
value 8.
Figur e 29.2 (a)  The linear program given in (29.18)–(29.21). Each constraint is represented by a line
and a direction. The intersection of the constraints, which is the feasible region, is highlighted in
blue. (b)  The red lines show , respectively , the points for which the objective value is 0, 4, and 8. The
optimal solution to the linear program is x 1  = 2 and x 2  = 6 with objective value 8.
It is no accident that an optimal solution to the linear program occurs at
a vertex of the feasible region. The maximum value of z  for which the line
x1  + x2  = z  intersects the feasible region must be on the boundary of the
feasible region, and thus the intersection of this line with the boundary of
the feasible region is either a single vertex or a line segment. If the
intersection is a single vertex, then there is just one optimal solution, and it
is that vertex. If the intersection is a line segment, every point on that line
segment must have the same objective value. In particular , both endpoints
of the line segment are optimal solutions. Since each endpoint of a line
segment is a vertex, there is an optimal solution at a vertex in this case as
well.
Although you cannot easily graph linear programs with more than two
variables, the same intuition holds. If you have three variables, then each
constraint corresponds to a half-space in three-dimensional space. The
intersection of these half-spaces forms the feasible region. The set of points
for which the objective function obtains a given value z  is now a plane
(assuming no degenerate conditions). If all coef ficients of the objective
function are nonnegative, and if the origin is a feasible solution to the linear
program, then as you move this plane away from the origin, in a direction
Page number: 1005
normal to the objective function, you find points of increasing objective
value. (If the origin is not feasible or if some coef ficients in the objective
function are negative, the intuitive picture becomes slightly more
complicated.) As in two dimensions, because the feasible region is convex,
the set of points that achieve the optimal objective value must include a
vertex of the feasible region. Similarly , if you have n  variables, each
constraint defines a half-space in n -dimensional space. W e call the feasible
region formed by the intersection of these half-spaces a simplex . The
objective function is now a hyperplane and, because of convexity , an
optimal solution still occurs at a vertex of the simplex. Any algorithm for
linear programming must also identify linear programs that have no
solutions, as well as linear programs that have no finite optimal solution.
The simplex algorithm  takes as input a linear program and returns an
optimal solution. It starts at some vertex of the simplex and performs a
sequence of iterations. In each iteration, it moves along an edge of the
simplex from a current vertex to a neighboring vertex whose objective
value is no smaller than that of the current vertex (and usually is lar ger .)
The simplex algorithm terminates when it reaches a local maximum, which
is a vertex from which all neighboring vertices have a smaller objective
value. Because the feasible region is convex and the objective function is
linear , this local optimum is actually a global optimum. In Section 29.3 ,
we’ll see an important concept called “duality ,” which we’ll use to prove
that the solution returned by the simplex algorithm is indeed optimal.
The simplex algorithm, when implemented carefully , often solves
general linear programs quickly in practice. W ith some carefully contrived
inputs, however , the simplex algorithm can require exponential time. The
first polynomial-time algorithm for linear programming was the ellipsoid
algorithm , which runs slowly in practice. A second class of polynomial-
time algorithms are known as interior-point methods . In contrast to the
simplex algorithm, which moves along the exterior of the feasible region
and maintains a feasible solution that is a vertex of the simplex at each
iteration, these algorithms move through the interior of the feasible region.
The intermediate solutions, while feasible, are not necessarily vertices of
the simplex, but the final solution is a vertex. For lar ge inputs, interior -point
algorithms can run as fast as, and sometimes faster than, the simplex
algorithm. The chapter notes point you to more information about these
algorithms.
Page number: 1006
If you add to a linear program the additional requirement that all
variables take on integer values, you have an integer linear program .
Exercise 34.5-3 on page 1098 asks you to show that just finding a feasible
solution to this problem is NP-hard. Since no polynomial-time algorithms
are known for any NP-hard problems, there is no known polynomial-time
algorithm for integer linear programming. In contrast, a general linear -
programming problem can be solved in polynomial time.
Exer cises
29.1-1
Consider the linear program
minimize −2 x1  + 3 x2
subject to
x 1  + x 2 = 7
x 1  − 2 x 2 ≤ 4
x 1 ≥ 0.
Give three feasible solutions to this linear program. What is the objective
value of each one?
29.1-2
Consider the following linear program, which has a nonpositivity
constraint:
minimize 2 x1  + 7 x2  + x3
subject to
x 1 − x 3 = 7
3 x 1  + x 2 ≥ 24
x 2 ≥ 0
x 3 ≤ 0.
Give three feasible solutions to this linear program. What is the objective
value of each one?
29.1-3
Page number: 1007
Show that the following linear program is infeasible:
maximize 3 x1  − 2 x2
subject to
x 1  + x 2 ≤ 2
−2 x 1  − 2 x 2 ≤ −10
x 1 , x 2 ≥ 0.
29.1-4
Show that the following linear program is unbounded:
maximize x1  − x2
subject to
−2 x 1  + x 2 ≤ −1
− x 1  − 2 x 2 ≤ −2
x 1 , x 2 ≥ 0.
29.1-5
Give an example of a linear program for which the feasible region is not
bounded, but the optimal objective value is finite.
29.1-6
Sometimes, in a linear program, you need to convert constraints from one
form to another .
a.  Show how to convert an equality constraint into an equivalent set of
inequalities. That is, given a constraint 
 , give a set of
inequalities that will be satisfied if and only if 
 ,
b.  Show how to convert an inequality constraint 
  into an
equality constraint and a nonnegativity constraint. Y ou will need to
introduce an additional variable s , and use the constraint that s  ≥ 0.
29.1-7
Explain how to convert a minimization linear program to an equivalent
maximization linear program, and ar gue that your new linear program is
equivalent to the original one.
Page number: 1008
29.1-8
In the political problem at the beginning of this chapter , there are feasible
solutions that correspond to winning more voters than there actually are in
the district. For example, you can set x2  to 200, x3  to 200, and x1  = x4  = 0.
That solution is feasible, yet it seems to say that you will win 400,000
suburban voters, even though there are only 200,000 actual suburban voters.
What constraints can you add to the linear program to ensure that you never
seem to win more voters than there actually are? Even if you don’ t add
these constraints, ar gue that the optimal solution to this linear program can
never win more voters than there actually are in the district.
29.2    Formulating pr oblems as linear pr ograms
Linear programming has many applications. Any textbook on operations
research is filled with examples of linear programming, and linear
programming has become a standard tool taught to students in most
business schools. The election scenario is one typical example. Here are
two more examples:
An airline wishes to schedule its flight crews. The Federal A viation
Administration imposes several constraints, such as limiting the
number of consecutive hours that each crew member can work and
insisting that a particular crew work only on one model of aircraft
during each month. The airline wants to schedule crews on all of its
flights using as few crew members as possible.
An oil company wants to decide where to drill for oil. Siting a drill at
a particular location has an associated cost and, based on geological
surveys, an expected payof f of some number of barrels of oil. The
company has a limited budget for locating new drills and wants to
maximize the amount of oil it expects to find, given this budget.
Linear programs also model and solve graph and combinatorial
problems, such as those appearing in this book. W e have already seen a
special case of linear programming used to solve systems of dif ference
constraints in Section 22.4 . In this section, we’ll study how to formulate
several graph and network-flow problems as linear programs. Section 35.4
Page number: 1009
uses linear programming as a tool to find an approximate solution to
another graph problem.
Perhaps the most important aspect of linear programming is to be able to
recognize when you can formulate a problem as a linear program. Once you
cast a problem as a polynomial-sized linear program, you can solve it in
polynomial time by the ellipsoid algorithm or interior -point methods.
Several linear -programming software packages can solve problems
ef ficiently , so that once the problem is in the form of a linear program, such
a package can solve it.
W e’ll look at several concrete examples of linear -programming
problems. W e start with two problems that we have already studied: the
single-source shortest-paths problem from Chapter 22  and the maximum-
flow problem from Chapter 24 . W e then describe the minimum-cost-flow
problem. (Although the minimum-cost-flow problem has a polynomial-time
algorithm that is not based on linear programming, we won’ t describe the
algorithm.) Finally , we describe the multicommodity-flow problem, for
which the only known polynomial-time algorithm is based on linear
programming.
When we solved graph problems in Part VI , we used attribute notation,
such as v . d  and ( u , v ). f . Linear programs typically use subscripted variables
rather than objects with attached attributes, however . Therefore, when we
express variables in linear programs, we indicate vertices and edges through
subscripts. For example, we denote the shortest-path weight for vertex v  not
by v . d  but by dv , and we denote the flow from vertex u  to vertex v  not by ( u ,
v ). f  but by fuv . For quantities that are given as inputs to problems, such as
edge weights or capacities, we continue to use notations such as w ( u , v ) and
c ( u , v ).
Shortest paths
W e can formulate the single-source shortest-paths problem as a linear
program. W e’ll focus on how to formulate the single-pair shortest-path
problem, leaving the extension to the more general single-source shortest-
paths problem as Exercise 29.2-2.
In the single-pair shortest-path problem, the input is a weighted, directed
graph G  = ( V , E ), with weight function w  : E  → ℝ  mapping edges to real-
valued weights, a source vertex s , and destination vertex t . The goal is to
Page number: 1010
compute the value dt , which is the weight of a shortest path from s  to t . T o
express this problem as a linear program, you need to determine a set of
variables and constraints that define when you have a shortest path from s
to t . The triangle inequality (Lemma 22.10 on page 633) gives dv  ≤ du  +
w ( u , v ) for each edge ( u , v ) ∈  E . The source vertex initially receives a value
ds  = 0, which never changes. Thus the following linear program expresses
the shortest-path weight from s  to t :
subject to
Y ou might be surprised that this linear program maximizes an objective
function when it is supposed to compute shortest paths. Minimizing the
objective function would be a mistake, because when all the edge weights
are nonnegative, setting dv  = 0 for all v  ∈  V  (recall that a bar over a variable
name denotes a specific setting of the variable’ s value) would yield an
optimal solution to the linear program without solving the shortest-paths
problem. Maximizing is the right thing to do because an optimal solution to
the shortest-paths problem sets each dv  to min { du  + w ( u , v ) : u  ∈  V  and ( u ,
v ) ∈  E }, so that dv  is the lar gest value that is less than or equal to all of the
values in the set { du  + w ( u , v ). Therefore, it makes sense to maximize dv  for
all vertices v  on a shortest path from s  to t  subject to these constraints, and
maximizing dt  achieves this goal.
This linear program has | V | variables dv , one for each vertex v  ∈  V . It
also has | E | + 1 constraints: one for each edge, plus the additional constraint
that the source vertex’ s shortest-path weight always has the value 0.
Maximum flow
Next, let’ s express the maximum-flow problem as a linear program. Recall
that the input is a directed graph G  = ( V , E ) in which each edge ( u , v ) ∈  E
has a nonnegative capacity c ( u , v ) ≥ 0, and two distinguished vertices: a
source s  and a sink t . As defined in Section 24.1 , a flow is a nonnegative
real-valued function f  : V  × V  → ℝ  that satisfies the capacity constraint and
Page number: 1011
flow conservation. A maximum flow is a flow that satisfies these
constraints and maximizes the flow value, which is the total flow coming
out of the source minus the total flow into the source. A flow , therefore,
satisfies linear constraints, and the value of a flow is a linear function.
Recalling also that we assume that c ( u , v ) = 0 if ( u , v ) ∉  E  and that there
are no antiparallel edges, the maximum-flow problem can be expressed as a
linear program:
subject to
This linear program has | V |2 variables, corresponding to the flow between
each pair of vertices, and it has 2 | V |2 + | V | − 2 constraints.
It is usually more ef ficient to solve a smaller -sized linear program. The
linear program in (29.25)–(29.28) has, for ease of notation, a flow and
capacity of 0 for each pair of vertices u , v  with ( u , v ) ∉  E . It is more
ef ficient to rewrite the linear program so that it has O ( V  + E ) constraints.
Exercise 29.2-4 asks you to do so.
Minimum-cost flow
In this section, we have used linear programming to solve problems for
which we already knew ef ficient algorithms. In fact, an ef ficient algorithm
designed specifically for a problem, such as Dijkstra’ s algorithm for the
single-source shortest-paths problem, will often be more ef ficient than
linear programming, both in theory and in practice.
The real power of linear programming comes from the ability to solve
new problems. Recall the problem faced by the politician in the beginning
of this chapter . The problem of obtaining a suf ficient number of votes,
while not spending too much money , is not solved by any of the algorithms
that we have studied in this book, yet it can be solved by linear
programming. Books abound with such real-world problems that linear
programming can solve. Linear programming is also particularly useful for
Page number: 1012
solving variants of problems for which we may not already know of an
ef ficient algorithm.
Figur e 29.3 (a)  An example of a minimum-cost-flow problem. Capacities are denoted by c  and costs
by a . V ertex s  is the source, and vertex t  is the sink. The goal is to send 4 units of flow from s  to t . (b)
A solution to the minimum-cost flow problem in which 4 units of flow are sent from s  to t . For each
edge, the flow and capacity are written as flow/capacity .
Consider , for example, the following generalization of the maximum-
flow problem. Suppose that, in addition to a capacity c ( u , v ) for each edge
( u , v ), you are given a real-valued cost a ( u , v ). As in the maximum-flow
problem, assume that c ( u , v ) = 0 if ( u , v ) ∉  E  and that there are no
antiparallel edges. If you send fuv  units of flow over edge ( u , v ), you incur a
cost of a ( u , v ) · fuv . Y ou are also given a flow demand d . Y ou wish to send d
units of flow from s  to t  while minimizing the total cost ∑( u , v ) ∈ E  a ( u , v ) · fuv
incurred by the flow . This problem is known as the minimum-cost-flow
problem .
Figure 29.3(a)  shows an example of the minimum-cost-flow problem,
with a goal of sending 4 units of flow from s  to t  while incurring the
minimum total cost. Any particular legal flow , that is, a function f  satisfying
constraints (29.26)–(29.28), incurs a total cost of ∑( u , v ) ∈ E  a ( u , v ) · fuv . What
is the particular 4-unit flow that minimizes this cost? Figure 29.3(b)  shows
an optimal solution, with total cost ∑( u , v ) ∈ E  a ( u , v ) · fuv  = (2 · 2) + (5 · 2) +
(3 · 1) + (7 · 1) + (1 · 3) = 27.
There are polynomial-time algorithms specifically designed for the
minimum-cost-flow problem, but they are beyond the scope of this book.
The minimum-cost-flow problem can be expressed as a linear program,
however . The linear program looks similar to the one for the maximum-
flow problem with the additional constraint that the value of the flow must
be exactly d  units, and with the new objective function of minimizing the
cost:
Page number: 1013
subject to
Multicommodity flow
As a final example, let’ s consider another flow problem. Suppose that the
Lucky Puck company from Section 24.1  decides to diversify its product line
and ship not only hockey pucks, but also hockey sticks and hockey helmets.
Each piece of equipment is manufactured in its own factory , has its own
warehouse, and must be shipped, each day , from factory to warehouse. The
sticks are manufactured in V ancouver and are needed in Saskatoon, and the
helmets are manufactured in Edmonton and must be shipped to Regina. The
capacity of the shipping network does not change, however , and the
dif ferent items, or commodities , must share the same network.
This example is an instance of a multicommodity-flow problem . The
input to this problem is once again a directed graph G  = ( V , E ) in which
each edge ( u , v ) ∈  E  has a nonnegative capacity c ( u , v ) ≥ 0. As in the
maximum-flow problem, implicitly assume that c ( u , v ) = 0 for ( u , v ) ∉  E
and that the graph has no antiparallel edges. In addition, there are k  dif ferent
commodities, K1 , K2 , … , Kk , with commodity i  specified by the triple Ki  =
( si , ti , di ). Here, vertex si  is the source of commodity i , vertex ti  is the sink
of commodity i , and di  is the demand for commodity i , which is the desired
flow value for the commodity from si  to ti . W e define a flow for commodity
i , denoted by fi , (so that fiuv  is the flow of commodity i  from vertex u  to
vertex v ) to be a real-valued function that satisfies the flow-conservation
and capacity constraints. W e define fuv , the aggregate flow , to be the sum of
the various commodity flows, so that 
 . The aggregate flow on
edge ( u , v ) must be no more than the capacity of edge ( u , v ). This problem
has no objective function: the question is to determine whether such a flow
Page number: 1014
exists. Thus the linear program for this problem has a “null” objective
function:
The only known polynomial-time algorithm for this problem expresses it as
a linear program and then solves it with a polynomial-time linear -
programming algorithm.
Exer cises
29.2-1
W rite out explicitly the linear program corresponding to finding the shortest
path from vertex s  to vertex x  in Figure 22.2(a)  on page 609.
29.2-2
Given a graph G , write a linear program for the single-source shortest-paths
problem. The solution should have the property that dv  is the shortest-path
weight from the source vertex s  to v  for each vertex v  ∈  V .
29.2-3
W rite out explicitly the linear program corresponding to finding the
maximum flow in Figure 24.1(a) .
29.2-4
Rewrite the linear program for maximum flow (29.25)–(29.28) so that it
uses only O ( V  + E ) constraints.
29.2-5
W rite a linear program that, given a bipartite graph G  = ( V , E ), solves the
maximum-bipartite-matching problem.
Page number: 1015
29.2-6
There can be more than one way to model a particular problem as a linear
program. This exercise gives an alternative formulation for the maximum-
flow problem. Let P  = { P1 , P2 , … , Pp } be the set of all  possible directed
simple paths from source s   to sink t . Using decision variables x1 , … , xp ,
where xi  is the amount of flow on path i , formulate a linear program for the
maximum-flow problem. What is an upper bound on p , the number of
directed simple paths from s  to t ?
29.2-7
In the minimum-cost multicommodity-flow problem , the input is a directed
graph G  = ( V , E ) in which each edge ( u , v ) ∈  E  has a nonnegative capacity
c ( u , v ) ≥ 0 and a cost a ( u , v ). As in the multicommodity-flow problem, there
are k  dif ferent commodities, K1 , K2 , … , Kk , with commodity i  specified by
the triple Ki  = ( si , ti , di ). W e define the flow fi  for commodity i  and the
aggregate flow fuv  on edge ( u , v ) as in the multicommodity-flow problem. A
feasible flow is one in which the aggregate flow on each edge ( u , v ) is no
more than the capacity of edge ( u , v ). The cost of a flow is ∑u , v ∈ E  a ( u , v ) ·
fuv , and the goal is to find the feasible flow of minimum cost. Express this
problem as a linear program.
29.3    Duality
W e will now introduce a powerful concept called linear-programming
duality . In general, given a maximization problem, duality allows you to
formulate a related minimization problem that has the same objective value.
The idea of duality is actually more general than linear programming, but
we restrict our attention to linear programming in this section.
Duality enables us to prove that a solution is indeed optimal. W e saw an
example of duality in Chapter 24  with Theorem 24.6, the max-flow min-cut
theorem. Suppose that, given an instance of a maximum-flow problem, you
find a flow f  with value | f |. How do you know whether f  is a maximum
flow? By the max-flow min-cut theorem, if you can find a cut whose value
is also | f |, then you have verified that f  is indeed a maximum flow . This
relationship provides an example of duality: given a maximization problem,
Page number: 1016
define a related minimization problem such that the two problems have the
same optimal objective values.
Given a linear program in standard form in which the objective is to
maximize, let’ s see how to formulate a dual  linear program in which the
objective is to minimize and whose optimal value is identical to that of the
original linear program. When referring to dual linear programs, we call the
original linear program the primal .
Given the primal linear program
subject to
its dual is
subject to
Mechanically , to form the dual, change the maximization to a
minimization, exchange the roles of coef ficients on the right-hand sides and
in the objective function, and replace each ≤ by ≥. Each of the m  constraints
in the primal corresponds to a variable yi  in the dual. Likewise, each of the
n  constraints in the dual corresponds to a variable xj  in the primal. For
example, consider the following primal linear program:
subject to

Page number: 1017
Its dual is
subject to
Although forming the dual can be considered a mechanical operation,
there is an intuitive explanation. Consider the primal maximization problem
(29.37)–(29.41). Each constraint gives an upper bound on the objective
function. In addition, if you take one or more constraints and add together
nonnegative multiples of them, you get a valid constraint. For example, you
can add constraints (29.38) and (29.39) to obtain the constraint 3 x1  + 3 x2  +
8 x3  ≤ 54. Any feasible solution to the primal must satisfy this new
constraint, but there is something else interesting about it. Comparing this
new constraint to the objective function (29.37), you can see that for each
variable, the corresponding coef ficient is at least as lar ge as the coef ficient
in the objective function. Thus, since the variables x1 , x2  and x3  are
nonnegative, we have that
3 x1  + x2  + 4 x3  ≤ 3 x1  + 3 x2  + 8 x3  ≤ 54,
and so the solution value to the primal is at most 54. In other words, adding
these two constraints together has generated an upper bound on the
objective value.
In general, for any nonnegative multipliers y1 , y2 , and y3 , you can
generate a constraint
y1 ( x1 + x2 +3 x3 )+ y2 (2 x1 +2 x2 +5 x3 )+ y3 (4 x1 + x2 +2 x3 ) ≤ 30 y1 +24 y2 +36 y3
from the primal constraints or , by distributing and regrouping,
( y1 +2 y2 +4 y3 ) x1 +( y1 +2 y2 + y3 ) x2 +(3 y1 +5 y2 +2 y3 ) x3  ≤ 30 y1 +24 y2 +36 y3 .
Now , as long as this constraint has coef ficients of x1 , x2 , and x3  that are at
least their objective-function coef ficients, it is a valid upper bound. That is,
as long as
Page number: 1018
y 1  + 2 y 2  + 4 y 3 ≥ 3,
y 1  + 2 y 2  + y 3 ≥ 1,
3 y 1  + 5 y 2  + 2 y 3 ≥ 4,
you have a valid upper bound of 30 y1 +24 y2 +36 y3 . The multipliers y1 , y2 ,
and y3  must be nonnegative, because otherwise you cannot combine the
inequalities. Of course, you would like the upper bound to be as small as
possible, and so you want to choose y  to minimize 30 y1  + 24 y2  + 36 y3 .
Observe that we have just described the dual linear program as the problem
of finding the smallest possible upper bound on the primal.
W e’ll formalize this idea and show in Theorem 29.4 that, if the linear
program and its dual are feasible and bounded, then the optimal value of the
dual linear program is always equal to the optimal value of the primal linear
program. W e begin by demonstrating weak duality , which states that any
feasible solution to the primal linear program has a value no greater than
that of any feasible solution to the dual linear program.
Lemma 29.1 (W eak linear-programming duality)
Let x  be any feasible solution to the primal linear program in (29.31)–
(29.33), and let ӯ  be any feasible solution to its dual linear program in
(29.34)–(29.36). Then
Proof    W e have
▪
Corollary 29.2
Let x  be a feasible solution to the primal linear program in (29.31)–(29.33),
and let ӯ  be a feasible solution to its dual linear program in (29.34)–(29.36).
Page number: 1019
If
then x  and ӯ  are optimal solutions to the primal and dual linear programs,
respectively .
Proof    By Lemma 29.1, the objective value of a feasible solution to the
primal cannot exceed that of a feasible solution to the dual. The primal
linear program is a maximization problem and the dual is a minimization
problem. Thus, if feasible solutions x  and ӯ  have the same objective value,
neither can be improved.
▪
W e now show that, at optimality , the primal and dual objective values
are indeed equal. T o prove linear programming duality , we will require one
lemma from linear algebra, known as Farkas’ s lemma, the proof of which
Problem 29-4 asks you to provide. Farkas’ s lemma can take several forms,
each of which is about when a set of linear equalities has a solution. In
stating the lemma, we use m  + 1 as a dimension because it matches our use
below .
Lemma 29.3 (Farkas’ s lemma)
Given M  ∈  ℝ( m +1)× n and g  ∈  ℝm +1, exactly one of the following statements
is true:
1 . There exists v  ∈  ℝn such that Mv  ≤ g ,
2 . There exists w  ∈  ℝm +1 such that w  ≥ 0, wTM  = 0 (an n -vector of all
zeros), and wTg < 0.
▪
Theorem 29.4 (Linear-programming duality)
Given the primal linear program in (29.31)–(29.33) and its corresponding
dual in (29.34)–(29.36), if both are feasible and bounded, then for optimal
solutions x * and y *, we have cTx * = bTy *.
Proof    Let μ  = bTy * be the optimal value of the dual linear program given
in (29.34)–(29.36). Consider an augmented set of primal constraints in
Page number: 1020
which we add a constraint to (29.31)–(29.33) that the objective value is at
least μ . W e write out this augmented primal  as
W e can multiply (29.48) through by −1 and rewrite (29.47)–(29.48) as
Here, 
  denotes an ( m +1)× n  matrix, x  is an n -vector , and 
  denotes
an ( m  + 1)-vector .
W e claim that if there is a feasible solution x  to the augmented primal,
then the theorem is proved. T o establish this claim, observe that x  is also a
feasible solution to the original primal and that it has objective value at least
μ . W e can then apply Lemma 29.1, which states that the objective value of
the primal is at most μ , to complete the proof of the theorem.
It therefore remains to show that the augmented primal has a feasible
solution. Suppose, for the purpose of contradiction, that the augmented
primal is infeasible, which means that there is no v  ∈  ℝn such that 
. W e can apply Farkas’ s lemma, Lemma 29.3, to inequalty
(29.49) with
Because the augmented primal is infeasible, condition 1 of Farkas’ s lemma
does not hold. Therefore, condition 2 must apply , so that there must exist a
w  ∈  ℝm +1 such that w  ≥ 0, wTM  = 0, and wTg  < 0. Let’ s write w  as 
for some ӯ  ∈  ℝm and λ  ∈  ℝ , where ӯ  ≥ 0 and λ  ≥ 0. Substituting for w , M ,
and g  in condition 2 gives
Unpacking the matrix notation gives

Page number: 1021
W e now show that the requirements in (29.50) contradict the assumption
that μ  is the optimal solution value for the dual linear program. W e consider
two cases.
The first case is when λ  = 0. In this case, (29.50) simplifies to
W e’ll now construct a dual feasible solution y ′ with an objective value
smaller than bTy *. Set y ′ = y * + ϵ  ӯ , for any ϵ  > 0. Since
y ′TA=( y * + ϵ  ӯ )TA
=y *TA  + ϵ  ӯTA
=y *TA(by (29.51))
≥cT (because y * is feasible),
y ′ is feasible. Now consider the objective value
bTy ′=bT( y * + ϵ  ӯ )
=bTy * + ϵ  bTӯ
<bTy *,
where the last inequality follows because ϵ  > 0 and, by (29.51), ӯTb  = bTӯ
< 0 (since both ӯTb  and bTӯ  are the inner product of b  and ӯ ), and so their
product is negative. Thus we have a feasible dual solution of value less than
μ , which contradicts μ  being the optimal objective value.
W e now consider the second case, where λ  > 0. In this case, we can take
(29.50) and divide through by λ  to obtain
Now set y ′ = ӯ / λ  in (29.52), giving
y ′TA  = cT and y ′Tb  < μ .
Thus, y ′ is a feasible dual solution with objective value strictly less than μ , a
contradiction. W e conclude that the augmented primal has a feasible
solution, and the theorem is proved.
▪
Fundamental theor em of linear pr ogramming
Page number: 1022
W e conclude this chapter by stating the fundamental theorem of linear
programming, which extends Theorem 29.4 to the cases when the linear
program may be either feasible or unbounded. Exercise 29.3-8 asks you to
provide the proof.
Theorem 29.5 (Fundamental theorem of linear programming)
Any linear program, given in standard form, either
1 . has an optimal solution with a finite objective value,
2 . is infeasible, or
3 . is unbounded.
▪
Exer cises
29.3-1
Formulate the dual of the linear program given in lines (29.6)–(29.10) on
page 852.
29.3-2
Y ou have a linear program that is not in standard form. Y ou could produce
the dual by first converting it to standard form, and then taking the dual. It
would be more convenient, however , to produce the dual directly . Explain
how to directly take the dual of an arbitrary linear program.
29.3-3
W rite down the dual of the maximum-flow linear program, as given in lines
(29.25)–(29.28) on page 862. Explain how to interpret this formulation as a
minimum-cut problem.
29.3-4
W rite down the dual of the minimum-cost-flow linear program, as given in
lines (29.29)–(29.30) on page 864. Explain how to interpret this problem in
terms of graphs and flows.
29.3-5
Show that the dual of the dual of a linear program is the primal linear
program.
Page number: 1023
29.3-6
Which result from Chapter 24  can be interpreted as weak duality for the
maximum-flow problem?
29.3-7
Consider the following 1-variable primal linear program:
maximize tx
subject to
rx ≤ s
x ≥ 0,
where r , s , and t  are arbitrary real numbers. State for which values of r , s ,
and t  you can assert that
1 . Both the primal linear program and its dual have optimal solutions
with finite objective values.
2 . The primal is feasible, but the dual is infeasible.
3 . The dual is feasible, but the primal is infeasible.
4 . Neither the primal nor the dual is feasible.
29.3-8
Prove the fundamental theorem of linear programming, Theorem 29.5.
Pr oblems
29-1     Linear-inequality feasibility
Given a set of m  linear inequalities on n  variables x1 , x2 , … , xn , the linear-
inequality feasibility problem  asks whether there is a setting of the
variables that simultaneously satisfies each of the inequalities.
a.  Given an algorithm for the linear -programming problem, show how to
use it to solve a linear -inequality feasibility problem. The number of
variables and constraints that you use in the linear -programming problem
should be polynomial in n  and m .
b.  Given an algorithm for the linear -inequality feasibility problem, show
how to use it to solve a linear -programming problem. The number of
Page number: 1024
variables and linear inequalities that you use in the linear -inequality
feasibility problem should be polynomial in n  and m , the number of
variables and constraints in the linear program.
29-2     Complementary slackness
Complementary slackness  describes a relationship between the values of
primal variables and dual constraints and between the values of dual
variables and primal constraints. Let x  be a feasible solution to the primal
linear program given in (29.31)–(29.33), and let ӯ  be a feasible solution to
the dual linear program given in (29.34)–(29.36). Complementary slackness
states that the following conditions are necessary and suf ficient for x  and ӯ
to be optimal:
and
a.  V erify that complementary slackness holds for the linear program in lines
(29.37)–(29.41).
b.  Prove that complementary slackness holds for any primal linear program
and its corresponding dual.
c.  Prove that a feasible solution x  to a primal linear program given in lines
(29.31)–(29.33) is optimal if and only if there exist values ӯ  = ( ӯ1 , ӯ2 , …
, ӯm ) such that
1 . ӯ  is a feasible solution to the dual linear program given in
(29.34)–(29.36),
2 . 
  for all j  such that xj  > 0, and
3 . ӯi  = 0 for all i  such that 
 .
29-3     Integer linear programming
An integer linear-programming problem  is a linear -programming problem
with the additional constraint that the variables x  must take on integer
Page number: 1025
values. Exercise 34.5-3 on page 1098 shows that just determining whether
an integer linear program has a feasible solution is NP-hard, which means
that there is no known polynomial-time algorithm for this problem.
a.  Show that weak duality (Lemma 29.1) holds for an integer linear
program.
b.  Show that duality (Theorem 29.4) does not always hold for an integer
linear program.
c.  Given a primal linear program in standard form, let P  be the optimal
objective value for the primal linear program, D  be the optimal objective
value for its dual, IP  be the optimal objective value for the integer version
of the primal (that is, the primal with the added constraint that the
variables take on integer values), and ID  be the optimal objective value
for the integer version of the dual. Assuming that both the primal integer
program and the dual integer program are feasible and bounded, show
that
IP  ≤ P  = D  ≤ ID .
29-4     Farkas’ s lemma
Prove Farkas’ s lemma, Lemma 29.3.
29-5     Minimum-cost circulation
This problem considers a variant of the minimum-cost-flow problem from
Section 29.2  in which there is no demand, source, or sink. Instead, the
input, as before, contains a flow network, capacity constraints c ( u , v ), and
edge costs a ( u , v ). A flow is feasible if it satisfies the capacity constraint on
every edge and flow conservation at every  vertex. The goal is to find,
among all feasible flows, the one of minimum cost. W e call this problem
the minimum-cost-circulation problem.
a.  Formulate the minimum-cost-circulation problem as a linear program.
b.  Suppose that for all edges ( u , v ) ∈  E , we have a ( u , v ) > 0. What does an
optimal solution to the minimum-cost-circulation problem look like?
c.  Formulate the maximum-flow problem as a minimum-cost-circulation
problem linear program. That is, given a maximum-flow problem
Page number: 1026
instance G  = ( V , E ) with source s , sink t  and edge capacities c , create a
minimum-cost-circulation problem by giving a (possibly dif ferent)
network G ′ = ( V ′, E ′) with edge capacities c ′ and edge costs a ′ such that
you can derive a solution to the maximum-flow problem from a solution
to the minimum-cost-circulation problem.
d.  Formulate the single-source shortest-path problem as a minimum-cost-
circulation problem linear program.
Chapter notes
This chapter only begins to study the wide field of linear programming. A
number of books are devoted exclusively to linear programming, including
those by Chvátal [ 94 ], Gass [ 178 ], Karlof f [ 246 ], Schrijver [ 398 ], and
V anderbei [ 444 ]. Many other books give a good coverage of linear
programming, including those by Papadimitriou and Steiglitz [ 353 ] and
Ahuja, Magnanti, and Orlin [ 7 ]. The coverage in this chapter draws on the
approach taken by Chvátal.
The simplex algorithm for linear programming was invented by G.
Dantzig in 1947. Shortly after , researchers discovered how to formulate a
number of problems in a variety of fields as linear programs and solve them
with the simplex algorithm. As a result, applications of linear programming
flourished, along with several algorithms. V ariants of the simplex algorithm
remain the most popular methods for solving linear -programming problems.
This history appears in a number of places, including the notes in [ 94 ] and
[ 246 ].
The ellipsoid algorithm was the first polynomial-time algorithm for
linear programming and is due to L. G. Khachian in 1979. It was based on
earlier work by N. Z. Shor , D. B. Judin, and A. S. Nemirovskii. Grötschel,
Lovász, and Schrijver [ 201 ] describe how to use the ellipsoid algorithm to
solve a variety of problems in combinatorial optimization. T o date, the
ellipsoid algorithm does not appear to be competitive with the simplex
algorithm in practice.
Karmarkar ’ s paper [ 247 ] includes a description of the first interior -point
algorithm. Many subsequent researchers designed interior -point algorithms.
Good surveys appear in the article of Goldfarb and T odd [ 189 ] and the book
by Y e [ 463 ].
Page number: 1027
Analysis of the simplex algorithm remains an active area of research. V .
Klee and G. J. Minty constructed an example on which the simplex
algorithm runs through 2n − 1 iterations. The simplex algorithm usually
performs well in practice, and many researchers have tried to give
theoretical justification for this empirical observation. A line of research
begun by K. H. Bor gwardt, and carried on by many others, shows that
under certain probabilistic assumptions on the input, the simplex algorithm
conver ges in expected polynomial time. Spielman and T eng [ 421 ] made
progress in this area, introducing the “smoothed analysis of algorithms” and
applying it to the simplex algorithm.
The simplex algorithm is known to run ef ficiently in certain special
cases. Particularly noteworthy is the network-simplex algorithm, which is
the simplex algorithm, specialized to network-flow problems. For certain
network problems, including the shortest-paths, maximum-flow , and
minimum-cost-flow problems, variants of the network-simplex algorithm
run in polynomial time. See, for example, the article by Orlin [ 349 ] and the
citations therein.
1 An intuitive definition of a convex region is that it fulfills the requirement that for any two points in
the region, all points on a line segment between them are also in the region.
Page number: 1028
30        Polynomials and the FFT
The straightforward method of adding two polynomials of degree n  takes
Θ( n ) time, but the straightforward method of multiplying them takes Θ( n2)
time. This chapter will show how the fast Fourier transform, or FFT , can
reduce the time to multiply polynomials to Θ( n  lg n ).
The most common use for Fourier transforms, and hence the FFT , is in
signal processing. A signal is given in the time domain : as a function
mapping time to amplitude. Fourier analysis expresses the signal as a
weighted sum of phase-shifted sinusoids of varying frequencies. The
weights and phases associated with the frequencies characterize the signal
in the frequency domain . Among the many everyday applications of FFT’ s
are compression techniques used to encode digital video and audio
information, including MP3 files. Many fine books delve into the rich area
of signal processing, and the chapter notes reference a few of them.
Polynomials
A polynomial  in the variable x  over an algebraic field F  represents a
function A ( x ) as a formal sum:
The values a0 , a1 , … , an −1  are the coef ficients  of the polynomial. The
coef ficients and x  are drawn from a field F , typically the set ℂ  of complex
numbers. A polynomial A ( x ) has degree  k  if its highest nonzero coef ficient
is ak , in which case we say that degree( A ) = k . Any integer strictly greater
than the degree of a polynomial is a degree-bound  of that polynomial.
Page number: 1029
Therefore, the degree of a polynomial of degree-bound n  may be any
integer between 0 and n  − 1, inclusive.
A variety of operations extend to polynomials. For polynomial addition ,
if A ( x ) and B ( x ) are polynomials of degree-bound n , their sum  is a
polynomial C ( x ), also of degree-bound n , such that C ( x ) = A ( x )+ B ( x ) for all
x  in the underlying field. That is, if
then
where cj  = aj  + bj  for j  = 0, 1, … , n  − 1. For example, given the
polynomials A ( x ) = 6 x3 + 7 x2 − 10 x  + 9 and B ( x ) = −2 x3 + 4 x  − 5, their sum
is C ( x ) = 4 x3 + 7 x2 − 6 x  + 4.
For polynomial multiplication , if A ( x ) and B ( x ) are polynomials of
degree-bound n , their product  C ( x ) is a polynomial of degree-bound 2 n  − 1
such that C ( x ) = A ( x ) B ( x ) for all x  in the underlying field. Y ou probably
have multiplied polynomials before, by multiplying each term in A ( x ) by
each term in B ( x ) and then combining terms with equal powers. For
example, you can multiply A ( x ) = 6 x3 + 7 x2 − 10 x  + 9 and B ( x ) = −2 x3 + 4 x
− 5 as follows:
Another way to express the product C ( x ) is
where

Page number: 1030
(By the definition of degree, ak  = 0 for all k  > degree( A ) and bk  = 0 for all k
> degree( B ).) If A  is a polynomial of degree-bound na  and B  is a polynomial
of degree-bound nb , then C  must be a polynomial of degree-bound na  + nb  −
1, because degree( C ) = degree( A ) + degree( B ). Since a polynomial of
degree-bound k  is also a polynomial of degree-bound k  + 1, we normally
make the somewhat simpler statement that the product polynomial C  is a
polynomial of degree-bound na  + nb .
Chapter outline
Section 30.1  presents two ways to represent polynomials: the coef ficient
representation and the point-value representation. The straightforward
method for multiplying polynomials of degree n —equations (30.1) and
(30.2)—takes Θ( n2) time with polynomials represented in coef ficient form,
but only Θ( n ) time with point-value form. Converting between the two
representations, however , reduces the time to multiply polynomials to just
Θ( n  lg n ). T o see why this approach works, you must first understand
complex roots of unity , which Section 30.2  covers. Section 30.2  then uses
the FFT and its inverse to perform the conversions. Because the FFT is used
so often in signal processing, it is often implemented as a circuit in
hardware, and Section 30.3  illustrates the structure of such circuits.
This chapter relies on complex numbers, and within this chapter the
symbol i  denotes 
  exclusively .
30.1    Repr esenting polynomials
The coef ficient and point-value representations of polynomials are in a
sense equivalent: a polynomial in point-value form has a unique counterpart
in coef ficient form. This section introduces the two representations and
shows how to combine them in order to multiply two degree-bound n
polynomials in Θ( n  lg n ) time.
Coefficient r epr esentation
A coef ficient representation  of a polynomial 
  of degree-
bound n  is a vector of coef ficients a  = ( a0 , a1 , … , an −1 ). Matrix equations
in this chapter generally treat vectors as column vectors.
Page number: 1031
The coef ficient representation is convenient for certain operations on
polynomials. For example, the operation of evaluating  the polynomial A ( x )
at a given point x0  consists of computing the value of A ( x0 ). T o evaluate a
polynomial in Θ( n ) time, use Horner ’ s rule :
Similarly , adding two polynomials represented by the coef ficient vectors a
= ( a0 , a1 , … , an −1 ) and b  = ( b0 , b1 , … , bn −1 ) takes Θ( n ) time: just produce
the coef ficient vector c  = ( c0 , c1 , … , cn −1 ), where cj  = aj  + bj  for j  = 0, 1, …
, n − 1.
Now , consider multiplying two degree-bound n  polynomials A ( x ) and
B ( x ) represented in coef ficient form. The method described by equations
(30.1) and (30.2) takes Θ( n2) time, since it multiplies each coef ficient in the
vector a  by each coef ficient in the vector b . The operation of multiplying
polynomials in coef ficient form seems to be considerably more dif ficult
than that of evaluating a polynomial or adding two polynomials. The
resulting coef ficient vector c , given by equation (30.2), is also called the
convolution  of the input vectors a  and b , denoted c  = a  ⊗  b . Since
multiplying polynomials and computing convolutions are fundamental
computational problems of considerable practical importance, this chapter
concentrates on ef ficient algorithms for them.
Point-value r epr esentation
A point-value representation  of a polynomial A ( x ) of degree-bound n  is a
set of n  point-value pairs
{( x0 , y0 ), ( x1 , y1 ), … , ( xn −1 , yn −1 )}
such that all of the xk  are distinct and
for k  = 0, 1, … , n  − 1. A polynomial has many dif ferent point-value
representations, since any set of n  distinct points x0 , x1 , … , xn −1  can serve
as a basis for the representation.
Computing a point-value representation for a polynomial given in
coef ficient form is in principle straightforward, since all you have to do is
Page number: 1032
select n  distinct points x0 , x1 , … , xn −1  and then evaluate A ( xk ) for k  = 0, 1,
… , n  − 1. W ith Horner ’ s method, evaluating a polynomial at n  points takes
Θ( n2) time. W e’ll see later that if you choose the points xk  cleverly , you can
accelerate this computation to run in Θ( n  lg n ) time.
The inverse of evaluation—determining the coef ficient form of a
polynomial from a point-value representation—is interpolation . The
following theorem shows that interpolation is well defined when the desired
interpolating polynomial must have a degree-bound equal to the given
number of point-value pairs.
Theorem 30.1 (Uniqueness of an interpolating polynomial)
For any set {( x0 , y0 ), ( x1 , y1 ), … , ( xn −1 , yn −1 )} of n  point-value pairs such
that all the xk  values are distinct, there is a unique polynomial A ( x ) of
degree-bound n  such that yk  = A ( xk ) for k  = 0, 1, … , n  − 1.
Proof    The proof relies on the existence of the inverse of a certain matrix.
Equation (30.3) is equivalent to the matrix equation
The matrix on the left is denoted V ( x0 , x1 , … , xn −1 ) and is known as a
V andermonde matrix . By Problem D-1 on page 1223, this matrix has
determinant
and therefore, by Theorem D.5 on page 1221, it is invertible (that is,
nonsingular) if the xk  are distinct. T o solve for the coef ficients aj  uniquely
given the point-value representation, use the inverse of the V andermonde
matrix:
a  = V ( x0 , x1 , … , xn −1 )−1y .
▪
The proof of Theorem 30.1 describes an algorithm for interpolation
based on solving the set (30.4) of linear equations. Section 28.1  shows how
Page number: 1033
to solve these equations in O ( n3) time.
A faster algorithm for n -point interpolation is based on Lagrange’ s
formula :
Y ou might want to verify that the right-hand side of equation (30.5) is a
polynomial of degree-bound n  that satisfies A ( xk ) = yk  for all k . Exercise
30.1-5 asks you how to compute the coef ficients of A  using Lagrange’ s
formula in Θ( n2) time.
Thus, n -point evaluation and interpolation are well-defined inverse
operations that transform between the coef ficient representation of a
polynomial and a point-value representation.1 The algorithms described
above for these problems take Θ( n2) time.
The point-value representation is quite convenient for many operations
on polynomials. For addition, if C ( x ) = A ( x ) + B ( x ), then C ( xk ) = A ( xk ) +
B ( xk ) for any point xk . More precisely , given point-value representations for
A ,
{( x0 , y0 ), ( x1 , y1 ), … , ( xn −1 , yn −1 )},
and for B ,
where A  and B  are evaluated at the same n  points, then a point-value
representation for C  is
Thus the time to add two polynomials of degree-bound n  in point-value
form is Θ( n ).
Similarly , the point-value representation is convenient for multiplying
polynomials. If C ( x ) = A ( x ) B ( x ), then C ( xk ) = A ( xk ) B ( xk ) for any point xk ,
and to obtain a point-value representation for C , just pointwise multiply a
point-value representation for A  by a point-value representation for B .
Polynomial multiplication dif fers from polynomial addition in one key
aspect, however: degree( C ) = degree( A ) + degree( B ), so that if A  and B  have
Page number: 1034
degree-bound n , then C  has degree-bound 2 n . A standard point-value
representation for A  and B  consists of n  point-value pairs for each
polynomial. Multiplying these together gives n  point-value pairs, but 2 n
pairs are necessary to interpolate a unique polynomial C  of degree-bound
2 n . (See Exercise 30.1-4.) Instead, begin with “extended” point-value
representations for A  and for B  consisting of 2 n  point-value pairs each.
Given an extended point-value representation for A ,
{( x0 , y0 ), ( x1 , y1 ), … , ( x2 n −1 , y2 n −1 )},
and a corresponding extended point-value representation for B ,
then a point-value representation for C  is
Given two input polynomials in extended point-value form, multiplying
them to obtain the point-value form of the result takes just Θ( n ) time, much
less than the Θ( n2) time required to multiply polynomials in coef ficient
form.
Finally , let’ s consider how to evaluate a polynomial given in point-value
form at a new point. For this problem, the simplest approach known is to
first convert the polynomial to coef ficient form and then evaluate it at the
new point.
Fast multiplication of polynomials in coefficient form
Can the linear -time multiplication method for polynomials in point-value
form expedite polynomial multiplication in coef ficient form? The answer
hinges on whether it is possible convert a polynomial quickly from
coef ficient form to point-value form (evaluate) and vice versa (interpolate).
Page number: 1035
Figur e 30.1  A graphical outline of an ef ficient polynomial-multiplication process. Representations
on the top are in coef ficient form, and those on the bottom are in point-value form. The arrows from
left to right correspond to the multiplication operation. The ω 2 n  terms are complex (2 n )th roots of
unity .
Any points can serve as evaluation points, but certain evaluation points
allow conversion between representations in only Θ( n  lg n ) time. As we’ll
see in Section 30.2 , if “complex roots of unity” are the evaluation points,
then the discrete Fourier transform (or DFT) evaluates and the inverse DFT
interpolates. Section 30.2  shows how the FFT accomplishes the DFT and
inverse DFT operations in Θ( n  lg n ) time.
Figure 30.1  shows this strategy graphically . One minor detail concerns
degree-bounds. The product of two polynomials of degree-bound n  is a
polynomial of degree-bound 2 n . Before evaluating the input polynomials A
and B , therefore, first double their degree-bounds to 2 n  by adding n  high-
order coef ficients of 0. Because the vectors have 2 n  elements, use “complex
(2 n )th roots of unity ,” which are denoted by the ω2 n  terms in Figure 30.1 .
The following procedure takes advantage of the FFT to multiply two
polynomials A ( x ) and B ( x ) of degree-bound n  in Θ( n  lg n )-time, where the
input and output representations are in coef ficient form. The procedure
assumes that n  is an exact power of 2, so if it isn’ t, just add high-order zero
coef ficients.
1 . Double degr ee-bound:  Create coef ficient representations of A ( x )
and B ( x ) as degree-bound 2 n  polynomials by adding n  high-order
zero coef ficients to each.
2 . Evaluate:  Compute point-value representations of A ( x ) and B ( x ) of
length 2 n  by applying the FFT of order 2 n  on each polynomial.
Page number: 1036
These representations contain the values of the two polynomials at
the (2 n )th roots of unity .
3 . Pointwise multiply:  Compute a point-value representation for the
polynomial C ( x ) = A ( x ) B ( x ) by multiplying these values together
pointwise. This representation contains the value of C ( x ) at each
(2 n )th root of unity .
4 . Interpolate:  Create the coef ficient representation of the polynomial
C ( x ) by applying the FFT on 2 n  point-value pairs to compute the
inverse DFT .
Steps (1) and (3) take Θ( n ) time, and steps (2) and (4) take Θ( n  lg n ) time.
Thus, once we show how to use the FFT , we will have proven the
following.
Theorem 30.2
T wo polynomials of degree-bound n  with both the input and output
representations in coef ficient form can be multiplied in Θ( n  lg n ) time.
▪
Exer cises
30.1-1
Multiply the polynomials A ( x ) = 7 x3 − x2 + x  − 10 and B ( x ) = 8 x3 − 6 x  + 3
using equations (30.1) and (30.2).
30.1-2
Another way to evaluate a polynomial A ( x ) of degree-bound n  at a given
point x0  is to divide A ( x ) by the polynomial ( x  − x0 ), obtaining a quotient
polynomial q ( x ) of degree-bound n  − 1 and a remainder r , such that
A ( x ) = q ( x )( x  − x0 ) + r .
Then we have A ( x0 ) = r . Show how to compute the remainder r  and the
coef ficients of q ( x ) from x0  and the coef ficients of A  in Θ( n ) time.
30.1-3
Given a polynomial 
 , define 
 . Show how to
derive a point-value representation for Arev( x ) from a point-value
Page number: 1037
representation for A ( x ), assuming that none of the points is 0.
30.1-4
Prove that n  distinct point-value pairs are necessary to uniquely specify a
polynomial of degree-bound n , that is, if fewer than n  distinct point-value
pairs are given, they fail to specify a unique polynomial of degree-bound n .
( Hint:  Using Theorem 30.1, what can you say about a set of n  − 1 point-
value pairs to which you add one more arbitrarily chosen point-value pair?)
30.1-5
Show how to use equation (30.5) to interpolate in Θ( n2) time. ( Hint:  First
compute the coef ficient representation of the polynomial ∏j ( x  − xj ) and then
divide by ( x  − xk ) as necessary for the numerator of each term (see Exercise
30.1-2). Y ou can compute each of the n  denominators in O ( n ) time.)
30.1-6
Explain what is wrong with the “obvious” approach to polynomial division
using a point-value representation: dividing the corresponding y  values.
Discuss separately the case in which the division comes out exactly and the
case in which it doesn’ t.
30.1-7
Consider two sets A  and B , each having n  integers in the range from 0 to
10 n . The Cartesian sum  of A  and B  is defined by
C  = { x  + y  : x  ∈  A  and y  ∈  B }.
The integers in C  lie in the range from 0 to 20 n . Show how , in O ( n  lg n )
time, to find the elements of C  and the number of times each element of C
is realized as a sum of elements in A  and B . ( Hint:  Represent A  and B  as
polynomials of degree at most 10 n .)
30.2    The DFT and FFT
In Section 30.1 , we claimed that by computing the DFT and its inverse by
using the FFT , it is possible to evaluate and interpolate a degree n
polynomial at the complex roots of unity in Θ( n  lg n ) time. This section
defines complex roots of unity , studies their properties, defines the DFT ,
Page number: 1038
and then shows how the FFT computes the DFT and its inverse in Θ( n  lg n )
time.
Complex r oots of unity
A complex nth root of unity  is a complex number ω  such that
ωn = 1.
There are exactly n  complex n th roots of unity: e2 πik / n for k  = 0, 1, … , n  −
1. T o interpret this formula, use the definition of the exponential of a
complex number:
eiu = cos( u ) + i  sin( u ).
Figure 30.2  shows that the n  complex roots of unity are equally spaced
around the circle of unit radius centered at the origin of the complex plane.
The value
Figur e 30.2  The values of 
  in the complex plane, where ω 8  = e2 πi /8 is the principal 8th
root of unity .
is the principal nth root of unity .2 All other complex n th roots of unity are
powers of ωn .
The n  complex n th roots of unity ,
form a group under multiplication (see Section 31.3 ). This group has the
same structure as the additive group ( ℤn , +) modulo n , since 

Page number: 1039
implies that 
 . Similarly , 
 . The following
lemmas furnish some essential properties of the complex n th roots of unity .
Lemma 30.3 (Cancellation lemma)
For any integers n  > 0, k  ≥ 0, and d  > 0,
Proof    The lemma follows directly from equation (30.6), since
▪
Corollary 30.4
For any even integer n  > 0,
Proof    The proof is left as Exercise 30.2-1.
▪
Lemma 30.5 (Halving lemma)
If n  > 0 is even, then the squares of the n  complex n th roots of unity are the
n /2 complex ( n /2)th roots of unity .
Proof    By the cancellation lemma, 
  for any nonnegative integer k .
Squaring all of the complex n th roots of unity produces each ( n /2)th root of
unity exactly twice, since
Thus 
  and 
  have the same square. W e could also have used Corollary
30.4 to prove this property , since 
  implies 
 , and
thus 
 .
▪
Page number: 1040
As we’ll see, the halving lemma is essential to the divide-and-conquer
approach for converting between coef ficient and point-value representations
of polynomials, since it guarantees that the recursive subproblems are only
half as lar ge.
Lemma 30.6 (Summation lemma)
For any integer n  ≥ 1 and nonzero integer k  not divisible by n ,
Proof    Equation (A.6) on page 1 142 applies to complex values as well as to
reals, giving
T o see that the denominator is not 0, note that 
  only when k  is
divisible by n , which the lemma statement prohibits.
▪
The DFT
Recall the goal of evaluating a polynomial
of degree-bound n  at 
 , 
 , 
  (that is, at the n  complex n th roots of
unity).3 The polynomial A  is given in coef ficient form: a  = ( a0 , a1 , … ,
an −1 ). Let us define the results yk , for k  = 0, 1, … , n  − 1, by

Page number: 1041
The vector y  = ( y0 , y1 , … , yn −1 ) is the discrete Fourier transform (DFT)  of
the coef ficient vector a  = ( a0 , a1 , … , an −1 ). W e also write y  = DFTn ( a ).
The FFT
The fast Fourier transform (FFT)  takes advantage of the special properties
of the complex roots of unity to compute DFTn ( a ) in Θ( n  lg n ) time, as
opposed to the Θ( n2) time of the straightforward method. Assume
throughout that n  is an exact power of 2. Although strategies for dealing
with sizes that are not exact powers of 2 are known, they are beyond the
scope of this book.
The FFT method employs a divide-and-conquer strategy , using the even-
indexed and odd-indexed coef ficients of A ( x ) separately to define the two
new polynomials Aeven( x ) and Aodd( x ) of degree-bound n /2:
Aeven( x ) = a0  + a2 x  + a4 x2 + ⋯  + an −2 xn /2−1,
Aodd( x ) = a1  + a3 x  + a5 x2 + ⋯  + an −1 xn /2−1.
Note that Aeven contains all the even-indexed coef ficients of A  (the binary
representation of the index ends in 0) and Aodd contains all the odd-indexed
coef ficients (the binary representation of the index ends in 1). It follows that
so that the problem of evaluating A ( x ) at 
 , 
  reduces to
1 . evaluating the degree-bound n /2 polynomials Aeven( x ) and Aodd( x ) at
the points
and then
2 . combining the results according to equation (30.9).
By the halving lemma, the list of values (30.10) consists not of n  distinct
values but only of the n /2 complex ( n /2)th roots of unity , with each root
occurring exactly twice. Therefore, the FFT recursively evaluates the
polynomials Aeven and Aodd of degree-bound n /2 at the n /2 complex ( n /2)th
roots of unity . These subproblems have exactly the same form as the
Page number: 1042
original problem, but are half the size, dividing an n -element DFTn
computation into two n /2-element DFTn /2  computations. This
decomposition is the basis for the FFT procedure on the next page, which
computes the DFT of an n -element vector a  = ( a0 , a1 , … , an −1 ), where n  is
an exact power of 2.
The FFT procedure works as follows. Lines 1–2 represent the base case
of the recursion. The DFT of 1 element is the element itself, since in this
case
y 0 =
= a 0  · 1
= a 0 .
Lines 5–6 define the coef ficient vectors for the polynomials Aeven and Aodd.
Lines 3, 4, and 12 guarantee that ω  is updated properly so that whenever
lines 10–1 1 are executed, 
 . (Keeping a running value of ω  from
iteration to iteration saves time over computing 
  from scratch each time
through the for  loop.4) Lines 7–8 perform the recursive DFTn /2
computations, setting, for k  = 0, 1, … , n /2 − 1,
FFT( a , n )
  1 if  n  == 1
  2 r eturn  a //  DFT of 1 element is the element itself
  3ω n  = e2 πi / n
  4 ω  = 1
  5aeven = ( a 0 , a 2 , … , a n −2 )
  6aodd = ( a 1 , a 3 , … , a n −1 )
  7yeven = FFT( aeven, n /2)
  8yodd = FFT( aodd, n /2)
  9 for  k  = 0 to  n /2 − 1 //  at this point , 
10
1 1
12 ω  = ωω n
13 r eturn  y

Page number: 1043
or , since 
  by the cancellation lemma,
Lines 10–1 1 combine the results of the recursive DFTn /2  calculations. For
the first n /2 results y0 , y1 , … , yn /2−1 , line 10 yields
For yn /2 , yn /2+1 , … , yn −1 , letting k  = 0, 1, … , n /2 − 1, line 1 1 yields
Thus the vector y  returned by FFT is indeed the DFT of the input vector a .
Lines 10 and 1 1 multiply each value 
  by 
 , for k  = 0, 1, … , n /2 − 1.
Line 10 adds this product to 
 , and line 1 1 subtracts it. Because each
factor 
  appears in both its positive and negative forms, we call the factors 
 twiddle factors .
T o determine the running time of the procedure FFT , note that exclusive
of the recursive calls, each invocation takes Θ( n ) time, where n  is the length
of the input vector . The recurrence for the running time is therefore
T ( n ) = 2 T ( n /2) + Θ( n )
= Θ( n  lg n ),
by case 2 of the master theorem (Theorem 4.1). Thus the FFT can evaluate
a polynomial of degree-bound n  at the complex n th roots of unity in Θ( n  lg
n ) time.
Interpolation at the complex r oots of unity
The polynomial multiplication scheme entails converting from coef ficient
form to point-value form by evaluating the polynomial at the complex roots
of unity , pointwise multiplying, and finally converting from point-value
form back to coef ficient form by interpolating. W e’ve just seen how to
Page number: 1044
evaluate, so now we’ll see how to interpolate the complex roots of unity by
a polynomial. T o interpolate, we’ll write the DFT as a matrix equation and
then look at the form of the matrix inverse.
From equation (30.4), we can write the DFT as the matrix product y  =
Vn a , where Vn  is a V andermonde matrix containing the appropriate powers
of ωn :
The ( k , j ) entry of Vn  is 
 , for j , k  = 0, 1, … , n  − 1. The exponents of the
entries of Vn  form a multiplication table for factors 0 to n  − 1.
For the inverse operation, which we write as 
 , multiply y  by
the matrix 
 , the inverse of Vn .
Theorem 30.7
For j , k  = 0, 1, … , n  − 1, the ( j , k ) entry of 
  is 
 .
Proof    W e show that 
 , the n  × n  identity matrix. Consider the ( k , k ′)
entry of 
 :
This summation equals 1 if k ′ = k , and it is 0 otherwise by the summation
lemma (Lemma 30.6). Note that in order for the summation lemma to apply ,
k ′ − k  must not be divisible by n . Indeed, it is not, since −( n  − 1) ≤ k ′ − k  ≤ n
− 1.
▪
W ith the inverse matrix 
  defined, 
  is given by
Page number: 1045
for j  = 0, 1, … , n  − 1. By comparing equations (30.8) and (30.1 1), you can
see that if you modify the FFT algorithm to switch the roles of a  and y ,
replace ωn  by 
 , and divide each element of the result by n , you get the
inverse DFT (see Exercise 30.2-4). Thus, 
  is computable in Θ( n  lg n )
time as well.
Thus, the FFT and the inverse FFT provide a way to transform a
polynomial of degree-bound n  back and forth between its coef ficient
representation and a point-value representation in only Θ( n  lg n ) time. In
the context of polynomial multiplication, we have shown the following
about the convolution a  ⊗  b  of vectors a  and b :
Theorem 30.8 (Convolution theorem)
For any two vectors a  and b  of length n , where n  is an exact power of 2,
where the vectors a  and b  are padded with 0s to length 2 n  and · denotes the
componentwise product of two 2 n -element vectors.
▪
Exer cises
30.2-1
Prove Corollary 30.4.
30.2-2
Compute the DFT of the vector (0, 1, 2, 3).
30.2-3
Do Exercise 30.1-1 by using the Θ( n  lg n )-time scheme.
30.2-4
W rite pseudocode to compute 
  in Θ( n  lg n ) time.
30.2-5
Page number: 1046
Describe the generalization of the FFT procedure to the case in which n  is
an exact power of 3. Give a recurrence for the running time, and solve the
recurrence.
★  30.2-6
Instead of performing an n -element FFT over the field of complex numbers
(where n  is an exact power of 2), let’ s use the ring ℤm  of integers modulo
m , where m  = 2tn /2 + 1 and t  is an arbitrary positive integer . W e can use ω  =
2t instead of ωn  as a principal n th root of unity , modulo m . Prove that the
DFT and the inverse DFT are well defined in this system.
30.2-7
Given a list of values z0 , z1 , … , zn −1  (possibly with repetitions), show how
to find the coef ficients of a polynomial P ( x ) of degree-bound n  + 1 that has
zeros only at z0 , z1 , … , zn −1  (possibly with repetitions). Y our procedure
should run in O ( n  lg2 n ) time. ( Hint:  The polynomial P ( x ) has a zero at zj  if
and only if P ( x ) is a multiple of ( x  − zj ).)
★  30.2-8
The chirp transform  of a vector a  = ( a0 , a1 , … , an −1 ) is the vector y  = ( y0 ,
y1 , … , yn −1 ), where 
  and z  is any complex number . The DFT is
therefore a special case of the chirp transform, obtained by taking z  = ωn .
Show how to evaluate the chirp transform for any complex number z  in O ( n
lg n ) time. ( Hint:  Use the equation
to view the chirp transform as a convolution.)
30.3    FFT cir cuits
Many of the FFT’ s applications in signal processing require the utmost
speed, and so the FFT is often implemented as a circuit in hardware. The
FFT’ s divide-and-conquer structure enables the circuit to have a parallel
structure so that the depth  of the circuit—the maximum number of
computational elements between any output and any input that can reach it
Page number: 1047
—is Θ(lg n ). Moreover , the structure of the FFT circuit has several
interesting mathematical properties, which we won’ t go into here.
Butterfly operations
Notice that the for  loop of lines 9–12 of the FFT procedure computes the
value 
  twice per iteration: once in line 10 and once in line 1 1. A good
optimizing compiler produces code that evaluates this common
subexpression  just once, storing its value into a temporary variable, so that
lines 10–1 1 are treated like the three lines
This operation, multiplying the twiddle factor 
  by 
 , storing the
product into the temporary variable t , and adding and subtracting t  from 
 ,
is known as a butterfly operation . Figure 30.3  shows it as a circuit, and you
can see how it vaguely resembles the shape of a butterfly . (Although less
colorfully , it could have been called a “bowtie” operation.)
Figur e 30.3  A circuit for a butterfly operation. (a)  The two input values enter from the left, the
twiddle factor 
  is multiplied by 
 , and the sum and dif ference are output on the right. (b)  A
simplified drawing of a butterfly operation, which we’ll use when drawing the parallel FFT circuit.
Page number: 1048
Figur e 30.4  The schema for the conquer and combine steps of an n -input, n -output FFT circuit,
FFT n , shown for n  = 8. Inputs enter from the left, and outputs exit from the right. The input values
first go through two FFT n /2  circuits, and then n /2 butterfly circuits combine the results. Only the top
and bottom wires entering a butterfly interact with it: wires that pass through the middle of a butterfly
do not af fect that butterfly , nor are their values changed by that butterfly .
Recursive cir cuit structur e
The FFT procedure follows the divide-and-conquer strategy that we first
saw in Section 2.3.1 :
Divide  the n -element input vector into its n /2 even-indexed and n /2 odd-
indexed elements.
Conquer  by recursively computing the DFT s of the two subproblems, each
of size n /2.
Combine  by performing n /2 butterfly operations. These butterfly operations
work with twiddle factors 
 , 
 .
The circuit schema in Figure 30.4  follows the conquer and combine
steps of this pattern for an FFT circuit with n  inputs and n  outputs, denoted
by FFTn . Each line is a wire that carries a value. Inputs enter from the left,
one per wire, and outputs exit from the right. The conquer step runs the
inputs through two FFTn /2  circuits, which are also constructed recursively .
The values produced by the two FFTn /2  circuits feed into n /2 butterfly
Page number: 1049
circuits, with twiddle factors 
 , 
 , to combine the results. The
base case of the recursion occurs when n  = 1, where the sole output value
equals the sole input value. An FFT1  circuit, therefore, does nothing, and so
the smallest nontrivial FFT circuit is FFT2 , a single butterfly operation
whose twiddle factor is 
 .
Figur e 30.5  The tree of input vectors to the recursive calls of the FFT procedure. The initial
invocation is for n  = 8.
Permuting the inputs
How does the divide step enter into the circuit design? Let’ s examine how
input vectors to the various recursive calls of the FFT procedure relate to
the original input vector , so that the circuit can emulate the divide step at
the start for all levels of recursion. Figure 30.5  arranges the input vectors to
the recursive calls in an invocation of FFT in a tree structure, where the
initial call is for n  = 8. The tree has one node for each call of the procedure,
labeled by the elements of the initial call as they appear in the
corresponding input vector . Each FFT invocation makes two recursive calls,
unless it has received a 1-element vector . The first call appears in the left
child, and the second call appears in the right child.
Looking at the tree, observe that if you arrange the elements of the
initial vector a  into the order in which they appear in the leaves, you can
trace the execution of the FFT procedure, but bottom up instead of top
down. First, take the elements in pairs, compute the DFT of each pair using
one butterfly operation, and replace the pair with its DFT . The vector then
holds n /2 two-element DFT s. Next, take these n /2 DFT s in pairs and
compute the DFT of the four vector elements they come from by executing
two butterfly operations, replacing two two-element DFT s with one four -
element DFT . The vector then holds n /4 four -element DFT s. Continue in
Page number: 1050
this manner until the vector holds two ( n /2)-element DFT s, which n /2
butterfly operations combine into the final n -element DFT . In other words,
you can start with the elements of the initial vector a , but rearranged as in
the leaves of Figure 30.5 , and then feed them directly into a circuit that
follows the schema in Figure 30.4 .
Let’ s think about the permutation that rearranges the input vector . The
order in which the leaves appear in Figure 30.5  is a bit-reversal
permutation . That is, letting rev( k ) be the lg n -bit integer formed by
reversing the bits of the binary representation of k , then vector element ak
moves to position rev( k ). In Figure 30.5 , for example, the leaves appear in
the order 0, 4, 2, 6, 1, 5, 3, 7. This sequence in binary is 000, 100, 010, 1 10,
001, 101, 01 1, 1 1 1, and you can obtain it by reversing the bits of each
number in the sequence 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7 or , in binary , 000, 001, 010, 01 1,
100, 101, 1 10, 1 1 1. T o see in general that the input vector should be
rearranged by a bit-reversal permutation, note that at the top level of the
tree, indices whose low-order bit is 0 go into the left subtree and indices
whose low-order bit is 1 go into the right subtree. Stripping of f the low-
order bit at each level, continue this process down the tree, until you get the
order given by the bit-reversal permutation at the leaves.
The full FFT cir cuit
Figure 30.6  depicts the entire circuit for n  = 8. The circuit begins with a bit-
reversal permutation of the inputs, followed by lg n  stages, each stage
consisting of n /2 butterflies executed in parallel. Assuming that each
butterfly circuit has constant depth, the full circuit has depth Θ(lg n ). The
butterfly operations at each level of recursion in the FFT procedure are
independent, and so the circuit performs them in parallel. The figure shows
wires running from left to right, carrying values through the lg n  stages. For
s  = 1, 2, … , lg n , stage s  consists of n /2s groups of butterflies, with 2s −1
butterflies per group. The twiddle factors in stage s  are 
 , 
 ,
where m  = 2s.
Exer cises
30.3-1
Show the values on the wires for each butterfly input and output in the FFT
circuit of Figure 30.6 , given the input vector (0, 2, 3, −1, 4, 5, 7, 9).
Page number: 1051
30.3-2
Consider an FFTn  circuit, such as in Figure 30.6 , with wires 0, 1, … , n −1
(wire j  has output yj ) and stages numbered as in the figure. Stage s , for s  =
1, 2 … , lg n , consists of n /2s groups of butterflies. Which two wires are
inputs and outputs for the j th butterfly circuit in the g th group in stage s ?
30.3-3
Consider a b -bit integer k  in the range 0 ≤ k  < 2b. T reating k  as a b -element
vector over {0, 1}, describe a b  × b  matrix M  such that the matrix-vector
product Mk  is the binary representation of rev( k ).
Figur e 30.6  A full circuit that computes the FFT in parallel, here shown for n  = 8 inputs. It has lg n
stages, and each stage comprises n /2 butterflies that can operate in parallel. As in Figure 30.4 , only
the top and bottom wires entering a butterfly interact with it. For example, the top butterfly in stage 2
has inputs and outputs only on wires 0 and 2 (the wires with outputs y 0  and y 2 , respectively). This
circuit has depth Θ(lg n ) and performs Θ( n  lg n ) butterfly operations altogether .
30.3-4
W rite pseudocode for the procedure B IT -R EVERSE -P ERMUT A TION ( a , n ),
which performs the bit-reversal permutation on a vector a  of length n  in-
place. Assume that you may call the procedure B IT -R EVERSE -O F ( k , b ),
which returns an integer that is the b -bit reversal of the nonnegative integer
k , where 0 ≤ k  < 2b.
★  30.3-5
Page number: 1052
Suppose that the adders within the butterfly operations of a given FFT
circuit sometimes fail in such a manner that they always produce a 0 output,
independent of their inputs. In addition, suppose that exactly one adder has
failed, but you don’ t know which one. Describe how you can identify the
failed adder by supplying inputs to the overall FFT circuit and observing
the outputs. How ef ficient is your method?
Pr oblems
30-1     Divide-and-conquer multiplication
a.  Show how to multiply two linear polynomials ax  + b  and cx  + d  using
only three multiplications. ( Hint:  One of the multiplications is ( a  + b ) · ( c
+ d ).)
b.  Give two divide-and-conquer algorithms for multiplying two
polynomials of degree-bound n  in Θ( nlg 3) time. The first algorithm
should divide the input polynomial coef ficients into a high half and a low
half, and the second algorithm should divide them according to whether
their index is odd or even.
c.  Show how to multiply two n -bit integers in O ( nlg 3) steps, where each
step operates on at most a constant number of 1-bit values.
30-2     Multidimensional fast Fourier transform
The 1-dimensional discrete Fourier transform defined by equation (30.8)
generalizes to d  dimensions. The input is a d -dimensional array A  = ( aj 1, j 2,
…, jd) whose dimensions are n1 , n2 , … , nd , where n1 n2  ⋯  nd  = n . The d -
dimensional discrete Fourier transform is defined by the equation
for 0 ≤ k1  < n1 , 0 ≤ k2  < n2 , … , 0 ≤ kd  < nd .
a.  Show how to produce a d -dimensional DFT by computing 1-dimensional
DFT s on each dimension in turn. That is, first compute n / n1  separate 1-
dimensional DFT s along dimension 1. Then, using the result of the DFT s
Page number: 1053
along dimension 1 as the input, compute n / n2  separate 1-dimensional
DFT s along dimension 2. Using this result as the input, compute n / n3
separate 1-dimensional DFT s along dimension 3, and so on, through
dimension d .
b.  Show that the ordering of dimensions does not matter , so that if you
compute the 1-dimensional DFT s in any order of the d  dimensions, you
compute the d -dimensional DFT .
c.  Show that if you compute each 1-dimensional DFT by computing the fast
Fourier transform, the total time to compute a d -dimensional DFT is O ( n
lg n ), independent of d .
30-3     Evaluating all derivatives of a polynomial at a point
Given a polynomial A ( x ) of degree-bound n , we define its t th derivative by
In this problem, you will show how to determine A( t )( x0 ) for t  = 0, 1, … , n
− 1, given the coef ficient representation ( a0 , a1 , … , an −1 ) of A ( x ) and a
point x0 .
a.  Given coef ficients b0 , b1 , … , bn −1  such that
show how to compute A( t )( x0 ), for t  = 0, 1, … , n  − 1, in O ( n ) time.
b.  Explain how to find b0 , b1 , … , bn −1  in O ( n  lg n ) time, given 
  for
k  = 0, 1, … , n  − 1.
c.  Prove that
where f ( j ) = aj  · j ! and
Page number: 1054
d.  Explain how to evaluate 
  for k  = 0, 1, … , n  − 1 in O ( n  lg n )
time. Conclude that you can evaluate all nontrivial derivatives of A ( x ) at
x0  in O ( n  lg n ) time.
30-4     Polynomial evaluation at multiple points
Problem 2-3 showed how to evaluate a polynomial of degree-bound n  at a
single point in O ( n ) time using Horner ’ s rule. This chapter described how to
evaluate such a polynomial at all n  complex roots of unity in O ( n  lg n ) time
using the FFT . Now , you will show how to evaluate a polynomial of degree-
bound n  at n  arbitrary points in O ( n  lg2 n ) time.
T o do so, assume that you can compute the polynomial remainder when
one such polynomial is divided by another in O ( n  lg n ) time. For example,
the remainder of 3 x3 + x2 − 3 x  + 1 when divided by x2 + x  + 2 is
(3 x3 + x2 − 3 x  + 1) mod ( x2 + x  + 2) = −7 x  + 5.
Given the coef ficient representation of a polynomial 
  and
n  points x0 , x1 , … , xn −1 , your goal is to compute the n  values A ( x0 ), A ( x1 ),
… , A ( xn −1 ). For 0 ≤ i  ≤ j  ≤ n  − 1, define the polynomials 
and Qij ( x ) = A ( x ) mod Pij ( x ). Note that Qij ( x ) has degree at most j  − i .
a.  Prove that A ( x ) mod ( x  − z ) = A ( z ) for any point z .
b.  Prove that Qkk ( x ) = A ( xk ) and that Q0, n −1 ( x ) = A ( x ).
c.  Prove that for i  ≤ k  ≤ j , we have both Qik ( x ) = Qij ( x ) mod Pik ( x ) and Qkj ( x )
= Qij ( x ) mod Pkj ( x ).
d.  Give an O ( n  lg2 n )-time algorithm to evaluate A ( x0 ), A ( x1 ), … , A ( xn −1 ).
30-5     FFT using modular arithmetic
As defined, the discrete Fourier transform requires computation with
complex numbers, which can result in a loss of precision due to round-of f
errors. For some problems, the answer is known to contain only integers,
and a variant of the FFT based on modular arithmetic can guarantee that the
answer is calculated exactly . An example of such a problem is that of
Page number: 1055
multiplying two polynomials with integer coef ficients. Exercise 30.2-6
gives one approach, using a modulus of length Ω( n ) bits to handle a DFT on
n  points. This problem explores another approach that uses a modulus of the
more reasonable length O (lg n ), but it requires that you understand the
material of Chapter 31 . Let n  be an exact power of 2.
a.  Y ou wish to search for the smallest k  such that p  = kn  + 1 is prime. Give a
simple heuristic ar gument why you might expect k  to be approximately ln
n . (The value of k  might be much lar ger or smaller , but you can
reasonably expect to examine O (lg n ) candidate values of k  on average.)
How does the expected length of p  compare to the length of n ?
Let g  be a generator of 
 , and let w  = gk mod p .
b.  Ar gue that the DFT and the inverse DFT are well-defined inverse
operations modulo p , where w  is used as a principal n th root of unity .
c.  Show how to make the FFT and its inverse work modulo p  in O ( n  lg n )
time, where operations on words of O (lg n ) bits take unit time. Assume
that the algorithm is given p  and w .
d.  Compute the DFT modulo p  = 17 of the vector (0, 5, 3, 7, 7, 2, 1, 6).
( Hint:  V erify and use the fact that g  = 3 is a generator of 
 .)
Chapter notes
V an Loan’ s book [ 442 ] provides an outstanding treatment of the fast Fourier
transform. Press, T eukolsky , V etterling, and Flannery [ 365 , 366 ] of fer a
good description of the fast Fourier transform and its applications. For an
excellent introduction to signal processing, a popular FFT application area,
see the texts by Oppenheim and Schafer [ 347 ] and Oppenheim and W illsky
[ 348 ]. The Oppenheim and Schafer book also shows how to handle cases in
which n  is not an exact power of 2.
Fourier analysis is not limited to 1-dimensional data. It is widely used in
image processing to analyze data in two or more dimensions. The books by
Gonzalez and W oods [ 194 ] and Pratt [ 363 ] discuss multidimensional
Fourier transforms and their use in image processing, and books by
T olimieri, An, and Lu [ 439 ] and V an Loan [ 442 ] discuss the mathematics of
multidimensional fast Fourier transforms.
Page number: 1056
Cooley and T ukey [ 101 ] are widely credited with devising the FFT in
the 1960s. The FFT had in fact been discovered many times previously , but
its importance was not fully realized before the advent of modern digital
computers. Although Press, T eukolsky , V etterling, and Flannery attribute
the origins of the method to Runge and König in 1924, an article by
Heideman, Johnson, and Burrus [ 21 1 ] traces the history of the FFT as far
back as C. F . Gauss in 1805.
Frigo and Johnson [ 161 ] developed a fast and flexible implementation of
the FFT , called FFTW (“fastest Fourier transform in the W est”). FFTW is
designed for situations requiring multiple DFT computations on the same
problem size. Before actually computing the DFT s, FFTW executes a
“planner ,” which, by a series of trial runs, determines how best to
decompose the FFT computation for the given problem size on the host
machine. FFTW adapts to use the hardware cache ef ficiently , and once
subproblems are small enough, FFTW solves them with optimized, straight-
line code. Moreover , FFTW has the advantage of taking Θ( n  lg n ) time for
any problem size n , even when n  is a lar ge prime.
Although the standard Fourier transform assumes that the input
represents points that are uniformly spaced in the time domain, other
techniques can approximate the FFT on “nonequispaced” data. The article
by W are [ 449 ] provides an overview .
1 Interpolation is a notoriously tricky problem from the point of view of numerical stability .
Although the approaches described here are mathematically correct, small dif ferences in the inputs or
round-of f errors during computation can cause lar ge dif ferences in the result.
2 Many other authors define ω n  dif ferently: ω n  = e−2 πi / n. This alternative definition tends to be used
for signal-processing applications. The underlying mathematics is substantially the same with either
definition of ω n .
3 The length n  is actually what Section 30.1  referred to as 2 n , since the degree-bound of the given
polynomials doubles prior to evaluation. In the context of polynomial multiplication, therefore, we
are actually working with complex (2 n )th roots of unity .
4 The downside of iteratively updating ω  is that round-of f errors can accumulate, especially for lar ger
input sizes. Several techniques to limit the magnitude of FFT round-of f errors have been proposed,
but are beyond the scope of this book. If several FFT s are going to be run on inputs of the same size,
then it might be worthwhile to directly precompute a table of all n /2 values of 
 .
Page number: 1057
31        Number -Theor etic Algorithms
Number theory was once viewed as a beautiful but lar gely useless subject in
pure mathematics. T oday number -theoretic algorithms are used widely , due
in lar ge part to the invention of cryptographic schemes based on lar ge prime
numbers. These schemes are feasible because we can find lar ge primes
quickly , and they are secure because we do not know how to factor the
product of lar ge primes (or solve related problems, such as computing
discrete logarithms) ef ficiently . This chapter presents some of the number
theory and related algorithms that underlie such applications.
W e start in Section 31.1  by introducing basic concepts of number theory ,
such as divisibility , modular equivalence, and unique prime factorization.
Section 31.2  studies one of the world’ s oldest algorithms: Euclid’ s
algorithm for computing the greatest common divisor of two integers, and
Section 31.3  reviews concepts of modular arithmetic. Section 31.4  then
explores the set of multiples of a given number a , modulo n , and shows
how to find all solutions to the equation ax  = b  (mod n ) by using Euclid’ s
algorithm. The Chinese remainder theorem is presented in Section 31.5 .
Section 31.6  considers powers of a given number a , modulo n , and presents
a repeated-squaring algorithm for ef ficiently computing ab mod n , given a ,
b , and n . This operation is at the heart of ef ficient primality testing and of
much modern cryptography , such as the RSA public-key cryptosystem
described in Section 31.7 . W e wrap up in Section 31.8 , which examines a
randomized primality test. This test finds lar ge primes ef ficiently , an
essential step in creating keys for the RSA cryptosystem.
Size of inputs and cost of arithmetic computations
Page number: 1058
Because we’ll be working with lar ge integers, we need to adjust how to
think about the size of an input and about the cost of elementary arithmetic
operations.
In this chapter , a “lar ge input” typically means an input containing
“lar ge integers” rather than an input containing “many integers” (as for
sorting). Thus, the size of an input depends on the number of bits  required
to represent that input, not just the number of integers in the input. An
algorithm with integer inputs a1 , a2 , …, ak  is a polynomial-time algorithm
if it runs in time polynomial in 1g a1 , 1g a2 , …, 1g ak , that is, polynomial in
the lengths of its binary-encoded inputs.
Most of this book considers the elementary arithmetic operations
(multiplications, divisions, or computing remainders) as primitive
operations that take one unit of time. Counting the number of such
arithmetic operations that an algorithm performs provides a basis for
making a reasonable estimate of the algorithm’ s actual running time on a
computer . Elementary operations can be time-consuming, however , when
their inputs are lar ge. It thus becomes appropriate to measure how many bit
operations  a number -theoretic algorithm requires. In this model,
multiplying two β -bit integers by the ordinary method uses Θ( β2) bit
operations. Similarly , dividing a β -bit integer by a shorter integer or taking
the remainder of a β -bit integer when divided by a shorter integer requires
Θ( β2) time by simple algorithms. (See Exercise 31.1-12.) Faster methods
are known. For example, a simple divide-and-conquer method for
multiplying two β -bit integers has a running time of Θ( β1g 3), and O ( β  1g β
1g 1g β ) time is possible. For practical purposes, however , the Θ( β2)
algorithm is often best, and we use this bound as a basis for our analyses. In
this chapter , we’ll usually analyze algorithms in terms of both the number
of arithmetic operations and the number of bit operations they require.
31.1    Elementary number -theor etic notions
This section provides a brief review of notions from elementary number
theory concerning the set ℤ  = {…, –2, –1, 0, 1, 2, …} of integers and the
set ℕ  = {0, 1, 2, …} of natural numbers.
Divisibility and divisors
Page number: 1059
The notion of one integer being divisible by another is key to the theory of
numbers. The notation d  | a  (read “ d  divides  a ”) means that a  = kd  for some
integer k . Every integer divides 0. If a  > 0 and d  | a , then | d | ≤ | a |. If d  | a ,
then we also say that a  is a multiple  of d . If d  does not divide a , we write d
∤  a .
If d  | a  and d  ≥ 0, then d  is a divisor  of a . Since d  | a  if and only if – d  | a ,
without loss of generality , we define the divisors of a  to be nonnegative,
with the understanding that the negative of any divisor of a  also divides a .
A divisor of a nonzero integer a  is at least 1 but not greater than | a |. For
example, the divisors of 24 are 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 12, and 24.
Every positive integer a  is divisible by the trivial divisors  1 and a . The
nontrivial divisors of a  are the factors  of a . For example, the factors of 20
are 2, 4, 5, and 10.
Prime and composite numbers
An integer a  > 1 whose only divisors are the trivial divisors 1 and a  is a
prime number  or , more simply , a prime . Primes have many special
properties and play a critical role in number theory . The first 20 primes, in
order , are
2, 3, 5, 7, 1 1, 13, 17, 19, 23, 29, 31, 37, 41, 43, 47, 53, 59, 61, 67, 71.
Exercise 31.1-2 asks you to prove that there are infinitely many primes. An
integer a  > 1 that is not prime is a composite number  or , more simply , a
composite . For example, 39 is composite because 3 | 39. W e call the integer
1 a unit , and it is neither prime nor composite. Similarly , the integer 0 and
all negative integers are neither prime nor composite.
The division theor em, r emainders, and modular equivalence
Given an integer n , we can partition the integers into those that are
multiples of n  and those that are not multiples of n . Much number theory is
based upon refining this partition by classifying the integers that are not
multiples of n  according to their remainders when divided by n . The
following theorem provides the basis for this refinement. W e omit the proof
(but see, for example, Niven and Zuckerman [ 345 ]).
Theorem 31.1 (Division theorem)
Page number: 1060
For any integer a  and any positive integer n , there exist unique integers q
and r  such that 0 ≤ r  < n  and a  = qn  + r .
▪
The value q  = ⌊ a / n ⌋  is the quotient  of the division. The value r  = a  mod
n  is the remainder  (or residue ) of the division, so that n  | a  if and only if a
mod n  = 0.
The integers partition into n  equivalence classes according to their
remainders modulo n . The equivalence class modulo n  containing an
integer a  is
[ a ]n  = { a  + kn  : k  ∈  ℤ }.
For example, [3]7  = {…, –1 1, –4, 3, 10, 17, …}, and [–4]7  and [10]7  also
denote this set. W ith the notation defined on page 64, writing a  ∈  [ b ]n  is the
same as writing a  = b  (mod n ). The set of all such equivalence classes is
When you see the definition
you should read it as equivalent to equation (31.1) with the understanding
that 0 represents [0]n , 1 represents [1]n , and so on. Each class is represented
by its smallest nonnegative element. Y ou should keep the underlying
equivalence classes in mind, however . For example, if we refer to –1 as a
member of ℤn , we are really referring to [ n  – 1]n , since –1 = n  – 1 (mod n ).
Common divisors and gr eatest common divisors
If d  is a divisor of a  and d  is also a divisor of b , then d  is a common divisor
of a  and b . For example, the divisors of 30 are 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 10, 15, and 30,
and so the common divisors of 24 and 30 are 1, 2, 3, and 6. Any pair of
integers has a common divisor of 1.
An important property of common divisors is that
More generally , for any integers x  and y ,

Page number: 1061
Also, if a  | b , then either | a | ≤ | b | or b  = 0, which implies that
The greatest common divisor  of two integers a  and b  which are not both
0, denoted by gcd( a , b ), is the lar gest of the common divisors of a  and b .
For example, gcd(24, 30) = 6, gcd(5, 7) = 1, and gcd(0, 9) = 9. If a  and b
are both nonzero, then gcd( a , b ) is an integer between 1 and min {| a |, | b |}.
W e define gcd(0, 0) to be 0, so that standard properties of the gcd function
(such as equation (31.9) below) hold universally .
Exercise 31.1-9 asks you to prove the following elementary properties of
the gcd function:
The following theorem provides an alternative and useful way to
characterize gcd( a , b ).
Theorem 31.2
If a  and b  are any integers, not both zero, then gcd( a , b ) is the smallest
positive element of the set { ax  + by  : x , y  ∈  ℤ } of linear combinations of a
and b .
Proof    Let s  be the smallest positive such linear combination of a  and b ,
and let s  = ax  + by  for some x , y  ∈  ℤ . Let q  = ⌊ a / s ⌋ . Equation (3.1 1) on
page 64 then implies
a  mod s = a  – qs
= a  – q ( ax  + by )
= a  (1 – qx ) + b  (– qy ),
so that a  mod s  is a linear combination of a  and b  as well. Because s  is the
smallest positive  such linear combination and 0 ≤ a  mod s  < s  (inequality
(3.12) on page 64), a  mod s  cannot be positive. Hence, a  mod s  = 0.
Therefore, we have that s  | a  and, by analogous reasoning, s  | b . Thus, s  is a
common divisor of a  and b , so that gcd( a , b ) ≥ s . By definition, gcd( a , b )
divides both a  and b , and s  is defined as a linear combination of a  and b .
Page number: 1062
Equation (31.4) therefore implies that gcd( a , b ) | s . But gcd( a , b ) | s  and s  >
0 imply that gcd( a , b ) ≤ s . Combining gcd( a , b ) ≥ s  and gcd( a , b ) ≤ s  yields
gcd( a , b ) = s . W e conclude that s , the smallest positive linear combination
of a  and b , is also their greatest common divisor .
▪
Theorem 31.2 engenders three useful corollaries.
Corollary 31.3
For any integers a  and b , if d  | a  and d  | b , then d  | gcd( a , b ).
Proof    This corollary follows from equation (31.4) and Theorem 31.2,
because gcd( a , b ) is a linear combination of a  and b ,
▪
Corollary 31.4
For all integers a  and b  and any nonnegative integer n , we have
gcd( an , bn ) = n  gcd( a , b ).
Proof    If n  = 0, the corollary is trivial. If n  > 0, then gcd( an , bn ) is the
smallest positive element of the set { anx  + bny  : x , y  ∈  ℤ }, which in turn is
n  times the smallest positive element of the set { ax  + by  : x , y  ∈  ℤ }.
▪
Corollary 31.5
For all positive integers n , a , and b , if n  | ab  and gcd( a , n ) = 1, then n  | b .
Proof    Exercise 31.1-5 asks you to provide the proof.
▪
Relatively prime integers
T wo integers a  and b  are relatively prime  if their only common divisor is 1,
that is, if gcd( a , b ) = 1. For example, 8 and 15 are relatively prime, since the
divisors of 8 are 1, 2, 4, and 8, and the divisors of 15 are 1, 3, 5, and 15.
The following theorem states that if two integers are each relatively prime
to an integer p , then their product is relatively prime to p .
Theorem 31.6
Page number: 1063
For any integers a , b , and p , we have gcd( ab , p ) = 1 if and only if gcd( a , p )
= 1 and gcd( b , p ) = 1 both hold.
Proof    If gcd( a , p ) = 1 and gcd( b , p ) = 1, then it follows from Theorem
31.2 that there exist integers x , y , x ′, and y ′ such that
ax  + py = 1,
bx ′ + py ′ = 1.
Multiplying these equations and rearranging gives
ab ( xx ′) + p ( ybx ′ + y ′ ax  + pyy ′) = 1.
Since 1 is thus a positive linear combination of ab  and p , it is the smallest
positive linear combination. Applying Theorem 31.2 implies gcd( ab , p ) = 1,
completing the proof in this direction.
Conversely , if gcd( ab , p ) = 1, then Theorem 31.2 implies that there exist
integers x  and y  such that
abx  + py  = 1.
W riting abx  as a ( bx ) and applying Theorem 31.2 again proves that gcd( a , p )
= 1. Proving that gcd( b , p ) = 1 is similar .
▪
Integers n1 , n2 , …, nk  are pairwise relatively prime  if gcd( ni , nj ) = 1 for
1 ≤ i  < j  ≤ k .
Unique prime factorization
An elementary but important fact about divisibility by primes is the
following.
Theorem 31.7
For all primes p  and all integers a  and b , if p  | ab , then p  | a  or p  | b  (or
both).
Proof    Assume for the purpose of contradiction that p  | ab , but that p  ∤  a
and p  ∤  b . Because p  > 1 and ab  = kp  for some k  ∈  ℤ , equation (31.10)
gives that gcd( ab , p ) = p . W e also have that gcd( a , p ) = 1 and gcd( b , p ) = 1,
since the only divisors of p  are 1 and p , and we assumed that p  divides
Page number: 1064
neither a  nor b . Theorem 31.6 then implies that gcd( ab , p ) = 1,
contradicting gcd( ab , p ) = p . This contradiction completes the proof.
▪
A consequence of Theorem 31.7 is that any composite integer can be
uniquely factored into a product of primes. Exercise 31.1-1 1 asks you to
provide a proof.
Theorem 31.8 (Unique prime factorization)
There is exactly one way to write any composite integer a  as a product of
the form
where the pi  are prime, p1  < p2  < … < pr , and the ei  are positive integers.
▪
As an example, the unique prime factorization of the number 6000 is 24 ·
31 · 53.
Exer cises
31.1-1
Prove that if a  > b  > 0 and c  = a  + b , then c  mod a  = b .
31.1-2
Prove that there are infinitely many primes. ( Hint:  Show that none of the
primes p1 , p2 , …, pk  divide ( p1 p2  ⋯  pk ) + 1.)
31.1-3
Prove that if a  | b  and b  | c , then a  | c .
31.1-4
Prove that if p  is prime and 0 < k  < p , then gcd( k , p ) = 1.
31.1-5
Prove Corollary 31.5.
31.1-6
Prove that if p  is prime and 0 < k  < p , then 
 . Conclude that for all integers
a  and b  and all primes p ,
Page number: 1065
( a  + b )p = ap + bp (mod p ).
31.1-7
Prove that if a  and b  are any positive integers such that a  | b , then
( x  mod b ) mod a  = x  mod a
for any x . Prove, under the same assumptions, that
x  = y  (mod b ) implies x  = y  (mod a )
for any integers x  and y .
31.1-8
For any integer k  > 0, an integer n  is a kth power  if there exists an integer a
such that ak = n . Furthermore, n  > 1 is a nontrivial power  if it is a k th power
for some integer k  > 1. Show how to determine whether a given β -bit
integer n  is a nontrivial power in time polynomial in β .
31.1-9
Prove equations (31.6)–(31.10).
31.1-10
Show that the gcd operator is associative. That is, prove that for all integers
a , b , and c , we have
gcd( a , gcd( b , c )) = gcd(gcd( a , b ), c ).
★  31.1-1 1
Prove Theorem 31.8.
31.1-12
Give ef ficient algorithms for the operations of dividing a β -bit integer by a
shorter integer and of taking the remainder of a β -bit integer when divided
by a shorter integer . Y our algorithms should run in Θ( β2) time.
31.1-13
Give an ef ficient algorithm to convert a given β -bit (binary) integer to a
decimal representation. Ar gue that if multiplication or division of integers
whose length is at most β  takes M ( β ) time, where M ( β ) = Ω( β ), then you can
convert binary to decimal in O ( M ( β ) 1g β ) time. ( Hint:  Use a divide-and-
Page number: 1066
conquer approach, obtaining the top and bottom halves of the result with
separate recursions.)
31.1-14
Professor Marshall sets up n  lightbulbs in a row . The lightbulbs all have
switches, so that if he presses a bulb, it toggles on if it was of f and of f if it
was on. The lightbulbs all start of f. For i  = 1, 2, 3, …, n , the professor
presses bulb i , 2 i , 3 i , …. After the last press, which lightbulbs are on? Prove
your answer .
31.2    Gr eatest common divisor
In this section, we describe Euclid’ s algorithm for ef ficiently computing the
greatest common divisor of two integers. When we analyze the running
time, we’ll see a surprising connection with the Fibonacci numbers, which
yield a worst-case input for Euclid’ s algorithm.
W e restrict ourselves in this section to nonnegative integers. This
restriction is justified by equation (31.8), which states that gcd( a , b ) =
gcd(| a |, | b |).
In principle, for positive integers a  and b , their prime factorizations
suf fice to compute gcd( a , b ). Indeed, if
with 0 exponents being used to make the set of primes p1 , p2 , …, pr  the
same for both a  and b , then, as Exercise 31.2-1 asks you to show ,
The best algorithms to date for factoring do not run in polynomial time.
Thus, this approach to computing greatest common divisors seems unlikely
to yield an ef ficient algorithm.
Euclid’ s algorithm for computing greatest common divisors relies on the
following theorem.
Theorem 31.9 (GCD recursion theorem)
For any nonnegative integer a  and any positive integer b ,
gcd( a , b ) = gcd( b , a  mod b ).
Page number: 1067
Proof    W e will show that gcd( a , b ) and gcd( b , a  mod b ) divide each other .
Since they are both nonnegative, equation (31.5) then implies that they must
be equal.
W e first show that gcd( a , b ) | gcd( b , a  mod b ). If we let d  = gcd( a , b ),
then d  | a  and d  | b . By equation (3.1 1) on page 64, a  mod b  = a  – qb , where
q  = ⌊ a / b ⌋ . Since a  mod b  is thus a linear combination of a  and b , equation
(31.4) implies that d  | ( a  mod b ). Therefore, since d  | b  and d  | ( a  mod b ),
Corollary 31.3 implies that d  | gcd( b , a  mod b ), that is,
Showing that gcd( b , a  mod b ) | gcd( a , b ) is almost the same. If we now
let d  = gcd( b , a  mod b ), then d  | b  and d  | ( a  mod b ). Since a  = qb  + ( a  mod
b ), where q  = ⌊ a / b ⌋ , we have that a  is a linear combination of b  and ( a  mod
b ). By equation (31.4), we conclude that d  | a . Since d  | b  and d  | a , we have
that d  | gcd( a , b ) by Corollary 31.3, so that
Using equation (31.5) to combine equations (31.14) and (31.15) completes
the proof.
▪
Euclid’ s algorithm
Euclid’ s Elements  (circa 300 B . C . E .) describes the following gcd algorithm,
although its origin might be even earlier . The recursive procedure E UCLID
implements Euclid’ s algorithm, based directly on Theorem 31.9. The inputs
a  and b  are arbitrary nonnegative integers.
E UCLID ( a , b )
1 if  b  == 0
2 r eturn  a
3 else r eturn  E UCLID ( b , a  mod b )
For example, here is how the procedure computes gcd(30, 21):
E UCLID (30, 21) = E UCLID (21, 9)
= E UCLID (9, 3)
= E UCLID (3, 0)
= 3.
Page number: 1068
This computation calls E UCLID  recursively three times.
The correctness of E UCLID  follows from Theorem 31.9 and the property
that if the algorithm returns a  in line 2, then b  = 0, so that by equation
(31.9), gcd( a , b ) = gcd( a , 0) = a . The algorithm cannot recurse indefinitely ,
since the second ar gument strictly decreases in each recursive call and is
always nonnegative. Therefore, EUCLID always terminates with the correct
answer .
The running time of Euclid’ s algorithm
Let’ s analyze the worst-case running time of E UCLID  as a function of the
size of a  and b . The overall running time of E UCLID  is proportional to the
number of recursive calls it makes. The analysis assumes that a  > b  ≥ 0, that
is, the first ar gument is greater than the second ar gument. Why? If b  = a  >
0, then a  mod b  = 0 and the procedure terminates after one recursive call. If
b  > a  ≥ 0, then the procedure makes just one more recursive call than when
a  > b , because in this case E UCLID ( a , b ) immediately makes the recursive
call E UCLID ( b , a ), and now the first ar gument is greater than the second.
Our analysis relies on the Fibonacci numbers Fk , defined by the
recurrence equation (3.31) on page 69.
Lemma 31.10
If a  > b  ≥ 1 and the call E UCLID ( a , b ) performs k  ≥ 1 recursive calls, then a
≥ Fk +2  and b  ≥ Fk +1 .
Proof    The proof proceeds by induction on k . For the base case of the
induction, let k  = 1. Then, b  ≥ 1 = F2 , and since a  > b , we must have a  ≥ 2 =
F3 . Since b  > ( a  mod b ), in each recursive call the first ar gument is strictly
lar ger than the second. The assumption that a  > b  therefore holds for each
recursive call.
Assuming inductively that the lemma holds if the procedure makes k  – 1
recursive calls, we shall prove that the lemma holds for k  recursive calls.
Since k  > 0, we have b  > 0, and E UCLID ( a , b ) calls E UCLID ( b , a  mod b )
recursively , which in turn makes k  – 1 recursive calls. The inductive
hypothesis then implies that b  ≥ Fk +1  (thus proving part of the lemma), and
a  mod b  ≥ Fk . W e have
b  + ( a  mod b ) = b  + ( a  – b  ⌊ a / b ⌋ ) (by equation (3.1 1))
Page number: 1069
≤ a ,
since a  > b  > 0 implies ⌊ a / b ⌋  ≥ 1. Thus,
a ≥ b  + ( a  mod b )
≥ F k +1  + F k
= F k +2 .
▪
The following theorem is an immediate corollary of this lemma.
Theorem 31.1 1 (Lamé’ s theorem)
For any integer k  ≥ 1, if a  > b  ≥ 1 and b  < Fk +1 , then the call E UCLID ( a , b )
makes fewer than k  recursive calls.
▪
T o show that the upper bound of Theorem 31.1 1 is the best possible,
we’ll show that the call E UCLID ( Fk +1 , Fk ) makes exactly k  – 1 recursive calls
when k  ≥ 2. W e use induction on k . For the base case, k  = 2, and the call
E UCLID ( F3 , F2 ) makes exactly one recursive call, to E UCLID (1, 0). (W e have
to start at k  = 2, because when k  = 1 we do not have F2  > F1 .) For the
inductive step, assume that E UCLID ( Fk , Fk −1 ) makes exactly k  – 2 recursive
calls. For k  > 2, we have Fk  > Fk −1  > 0 and Fk +1  = Fk  + Fk −1 , and so by
Exercise 31.1-1, we have Fk +1  mod Fk  = Fk −1 . Because E UCLID ( a , b ) calls
E UCLID ( b , a  mod b ) when b  > 0, the call E UCLID ( Fk +1 , Fk ) recurses one time
more than the call E UCLID ( Fk , Fk −1 ), or exactly k  – 1 times, which meets the
upper bound given by Theorem 31.1 1.
Since Fk  is approximately 
 , where ϕ  is the golden ratio 
defined by equation (3.32) on page 69, the number of recursive calls in
E UCLID  is O (1g b ). (See Exercise 31.2-5 for a tighter bound.) Therefore, a
call of E UCLID  on two β -bit numbers performs O ( β ) arithmetic operations
and O ( β3) bit operations (assuming that multiplication and division of β -bit
numbers take O ( β2) bit operations). Problem 31-2 asks you to prove an
O ( β2) bound on the number of bit operations.
The extended form of Euclid’ s algorithm
Page number: 1070
By rewriting Euclid’ s algorithm, we can gain additional useful information.
Specifically , let’ s extend the algorithm to compute the integer coef ficients x
and y  such that
where either or both of x  and y  may be zero or negative. These coef ficients
will prove useful later for computing modular multiplicative inverses. The
procedure E XTENDED -E UCLID  takes as input a pair of nonnegative integers
and returns a triple of the form ( d , x , y ) that satisfies equation (31.16). As an
example, Figure 31.1  traces out the call E XTENDED -E UCLID (99, 78).
E XTENDED -E UCLID ( a , b )
1 if  b  == 0
2 r eturn  ( a , 1, 0)
3 else  ( d ′, x ′, y ′) = E XTENDED -E UCLID ( b , a  mod b )
4 ( d , x , y ) = ( d ′, y ′, x ′ – ⌊ a / b ⌋  y ′)
5 r eturn  ( d , x , y )
The E XTENDED -E UCLID  procedure is a variation of the E UCLID  procedure.
Line 1 is equivalent to the test “ b  == 0” in line 1 of E UCLID . If b  = 0, then
E XTENDED -E UCLID  returns not only d  = a  in line 2, but also the coef ficients x
= 1 and y  = 0, so that a  = ax  + by . If b  ≠ 0, E XTENDED -E UCLID  first computes
( d ′, x ′, y ′) such that d ′ = gcd( b , a  mod b ) and
As in the E UCLID  procedure, we have d  = gcd( a , b ) = d ′ = gcd( b , a  mod b ).
T o obtain x  and y  such that d  = ax  + by , let’ s rewrite equation (31.17),
setting d  = d ′ and using equation (3.1 1):
Page number: 1071
Figur e 31.1  How E XTENDED -E UCLID  computes gcd(99, 78). Each line shows one level of the
recursion: the values of the inputs a  and b , the computed value ⌊ a / b ⌋ , and the values d , x , and y
returned. The triple ( d , x , y ) returned becomes the triple ( d ′, x ′, y ′) used at the next higher level of
recursion. The call E XTENDED -E UCLID (99, 78) returns (3, –1 1, 14), so that gcd(99, 78) = 3 = 99 ·
(–1 1) + 78 · 14.
d = bx ′ + ( a  – b  ⌊ a / b ⌋ ) y ′
= ay ′ + b ( x ′ – ⌊ a / b ⌋  y ′).
Thus, choosing x  = y ′ and y  = x ′ – ⌊ a / b ⌋  y ′ satisfies the equation d  = ax  + by ,
thereby proving the correctness of E XTENDED -E UCLID .
Since the number of recursive calls made in E UCLID  is equal to the
number of recursive calls made in E XTENDED -E UCLID , the running times of
E UCLID  and E XTENDED -E UCLID  are the same, to within a constant factor .
That is, for a  > b  > 0, the number of recursive calls is O (1g b ).
Exer cises
31.2-1
Prove that equations (31.1 1) and (31.12) imply equation (31.13).
31.2-2
Compute the values ( d , x , y ) that the call E XTENDED -E UCLID (899, 493)
returns.
31.2-3
Prove that for all integers a , k , and n ,
Use equation (31.18) to show that a  = 1 (mod n ) implies gcd( a , n ) = 1.
31.2-4
Page number: 1072
Rewrite E UCLID  in an iterative form that uses only a constant amount of
memory (that is, stores only a constant number of integer values).
31.2-5
If a  > b  ≥ 0, show that the call E UCLID  ( a , b ) makes at most 1 + logϕ  b
recursive calls. Improve this bound to 1 + logϕ ( b /gcd( a , b) ).
31.2-6
What does E XTENDED -E UCLID ( Fk +1 , Fk ) return? Prove your answer correct.
31.2-7
Define the gcd function for more than two ar guments by the recursive
equation gcd( a0 , a1 , …, an ) = gcd( a0 , gcd( a1 , a2 , …, an )). Show that the gcd
function returns the same answer independent of the order in which its
ar guments are specified. Also show how to find integers x0 , x1 , …, xn  such
that gcd( a0 , a1 , …, an ) = a0 x0  + a1 x1  + ⋯  + an xn . Show that the number of
divisions performed by your algorithm is O ( n  + 1g(max { a0 , a1 , …, an })).
31.2-8
The least common multiple  1cm( a1 , a2 , …, an ) of integers a1 , a2 , …, an  is
the smallest nonnegative integer that is a multiple of each ai . Show how to
compute 1cm( a1 , a2 , …, an ) ef ficiently using the (two-ar gument) gcd
operation as a subroutine.
31.2-9
Prove that n1 , n2 , n3 , and n4  are pairwise relatively prime if and only if
gcd( n1 n2 , n3 n4 ) = gcd( n1 n3 , n2 n4 ) = 1.
More generally , show that n1 , n2 , …, nk  are pairwise relatively prime if and
only if a set of ⌈ 1g k ⌉  pairs of numbers derived from the ni  are relatively
prime.
31.3    Modular arithmetic
Informally , you can think of modular arithmetic as arithmetic as usual over
the integers, except that when working modulo n , then every result x  is
Page number: 1073
replaced by the element of {0, 1, …, n  – 1} that is equivalent to x , modulo n
(so that x  is replaced by x  mod n ). This informal model suf fices if you stick
to the operations of addition, subtraction, and multiplication. A more formal
model for modular arithmetic, which follows, is best described within the
framework of group theory .
Finite gr oups
A group  ( S , ⊕ ) is a set S  together with a binary operation ⊕  defined on S
for which the following properties hold:
1 . Closur e:  For all a , b  ∈  S , we have a  ⊕  b  ∈  S .
2 . Identity:  There exists an element e  ∈  S , called the identity  of the
group, such that e  ⊕  a  = a  ⊕  e  = a  for all a  ∈  S .
3 . Associativity:  For all a , b , c  ∈  S , we have ( a  ⊕  b ) ⊕  c  = a  ⊕  ( b  ⊕
c ).
4 . Inverses:  For each a  ∈  S , there exists a unique element b  ∈  S ,
called the inverse  of a , such that a  ⊕  b  = b  ⊕  a  = e .
As an example, consider the familiar group ( ℤ , +) of the integers ℤ  under
the operation of addition: 0 is the identity , and the inverse of a  is – a . An
abelian group  ( S , ⊕ ) satisfies the commutative law  a  ⊕  b  = b  ⊕  a  for all a ,
b  ∈  S . The size  of group ( S , ⊕ ) is | S |, and if | S | < ∞, then ( S , ⊕ ) is a finite
group .
The gr oups defined by modular addition and multiplication
W e can form two finite abelian groups by using addition and multiplication
modulo n , where n  is a positive integer . These groups are based on the
equivalence classes of the integers modulo n , defined in Section 31.1 .
T o define a group on ℤn , we need suitable binary operations, which we
obtain by redefining the ordinary operations of addition and multiplication.
W e can define addition and multiplication operations for ℤn , because the
equivalence class of two integers uniquely determines the equivalence class
of their sum or product. That is, if a  = a ′ (mod n ) and b  = b ′ (mod n ), then
a  + b = a ′ + b ′ (mod n ),
ab = a ′ b ′ (mod n ).
Page number: 1074
Thus, we define addition and multiplication modulo n , denoted +n  and ·n , by
(W e can define subtraction similarly on ℤn  by [ a ]n  –n  [ b ]n  = [ a  – b ]n , but
division is more complicated, as we’ll see.) These facts justify the common
and convenient practice of using the smallest nonnegative element of each
equivalence class as its representative when performing computations in
ℤn . W e add, subtract, and multiply as usual on the representatives, but we
replace each result x  by the representative of its class, that is, by x  mod n .
Figur e 31.2  T wo finite groups. Equivalence classes are denoted by their representative elements. (a)
The group ( ℤ 6 , + 6 ). (b)  The group 
 .
Using this definition of addition modulo n , we define the additive group
modulo n  as ( ℤn , +n ). The size of the additive group modulo n  is | ℤn | = n .
Figure 31.2(a)  gives the operation table for the group ( ℤ6 , +6 ).
Theorem 31.12
The system ( ℤn , +n ) is a finite abelian group.
Proof    Equation (31.19) shows that ( ℤn , +n ) is closed. Associativity and
commutativity of +n  follow from the associativity and commutativity of +:
([ a ] n  + n  [ b ] n ) + n  [ c ] n = [ a  + b ] n  + n  [ c ] n
= [( a  + b ) + c ] n
= [ a  + ( b  + c )] n
Page number: 1075
= [ a ] n  + n  [ b  + c ] n
= [ a ] n  + n  ([ b ] n  + n  [ c ] n ),
 
[ a ] n  + n  [ b ] n = [ a  + b ] n
= [ b  + a ] n
= [ b ] n  + n  [ a ] n .
The identity element of ( ℤn , +n ) is 0 (that is, [0]n ). The (additive) inverse of
an element a  (that is, of [ a ]n ) is the element – a  (that is, [– a ]n  or [ n  – a ]n ),
since [ a ]n  +n  [– a ]n  = [ a  – a ]n  = [0]n .
▪
Using the definition of multiplication modulo n , we define the
multiplicative group modulo n  as 
 . The elements of this group are the
set 
  of elements in ℤn  that are relatively prime to n , so that each one has a
unique inverse, modulo n :
T o see that 
  is well defined, note that for 0 ≤ a  < n , we have a  = ( a  + kn )
(mod n ) for all integers k . By Exercise 31.2-3, therefore, gcd( a , n ) = 1
implies gcd( a  + kn , n ) = 1 for all integers k . Since [ a ]n  = { a  + kn  : k  ∈  ℤ },
the set 
  is well defined. An example of such a group is
where the group operation is multiplication modulo 15. (W e have denoted
an element [ a ]15  as a , and thus, for example, we denote [7]15  as 7.) Figure
31.2(b)  shows the group 
 . For example, 8 · 1 1 = 13 (mod 15),
working in 
 . The identity for this group is 1.
Theorem 31.13
The system 
  is a finite abelian group.
Proof    Theorem 31.6 implies that 
  is closed. Associativity and
commutativity can be proved for ·n  as they were for +n  in the proof of
Theorem 31.12. The identity element is [1]n . T o show the existence of
inverses, let a  be an element of 
  and let ( d , x , y ) be returned by
E XTENDED -E UCLID ( a , n ). Then we have d  = 1, since 
 , and
Page number: 1076
or equivalently ,
ax  = 1 (mod n ).
Thus [ x ]n  is a multiplicative inverse of [ a ]n , modulo n . Furthermore, we
claim that 
 . T o see why , equation (31.20) demonstrates that the
smallest positive linear combination of x  and n  must be 1. Therefore,
Theorem 31.2 implies that gcd( x , n ) = 1. W e defer the proof that inverses
are uniquely defined until Corollary 31.26 in Section 31.4 .
▪
As an example of computing multiplicative inverses, suppose that a  = 5
and n  = 1 1. Then E XTENDED -E UCLID ( a , n ) returns ( d , x , y ) = (1, –2, 1), so
that 1 = 5 · (–2) + 1 1 · 1. Thus, [–2]1 1  (i.e., [9]1 1 ) is the multiplicative
inverse of [5]1 1 .
When working with the groups ( ℤn , +n ) and 
  in the remainder of
this chapter , we follow the convenient practice of denoting equivalence
classes by their representative elements and denoting the operations +n  and
·n  by the usual arithmetic notations + and · (or juxtaposition, so that ab  = a  ·
b ) respectively . Furthermore, equivalences modulo n  may also be
interpreted as equations in ℤn . For example, the following two statements
are equivalent:
ax  = b  (mod n )
and
[ a ]n  ·n  [ x ]n  = [ b ]n .
As a further convenience, we sometimes refer to a group ( S , ⊕ ) merely
as S  when the operation ⊕  is understood from context. W e may thus refer to
the groups ( ℤn , +n ) and 
  as just ℤn  and 
 , respectively .
W e denote the (multiplicative) inverse of an element a  by ( a−1 mod n ).
Division in 
  is defined by the equation a / b  = ab−1 (mod n ). For example,
in 
  we have that 7−1 = 13 (mod 15), since 7 · 13 = 91 = 1 (mod 15), so
that 2/7 = 2 · 13 = 1 1 (mod 15).
Page number: 1077
The size of 
  is denoted ϕ ( n ). This function, known as Euler ’ s phi
function , satisfies the equation
so that p  runs over all the primes dividing n  (including n  itself, if n  is
prime). W e won’ t prove this formula here. Intuitively , begin with a list of
the n  remainders {0, 1, …, n  – 1} and then, for each prime p  that divides n ,
cross out every multiple of p  in the list. For example, since the prime
divisors of 45 are 3 and 5,
If p  is prime, then 
 , and
If n  is composite, then ϕ ( n ) < n  – 1, although it can be shown that
for n  ≥ 3, where γ  = 0.5772156649 … is Euler ’ s constant . A somewhat
simpler (but looser) lower bound for n  > 5 is
The lower bound (31.23) is essentially the best possible, since
Subgr oups
If ( S , ⊕ ) is a group, S ′ ⊆  S , and ( S ′, ⊕ ) is also a group, then ( S ′, ⊕ ) is a
subgroup  of ( S , ⊕ ). For example, the even integers form a subgroup of the
integers under the operation of addition. The following theorem, whose
Page number: 1078
proof we leave as Exercise 31.3-3, provides a useful tool for recognizing
subgroups.
Theorem 31.14 (A nonempty closed subset of a finite group is a subgroup)
If ( S , ⊕ ) is a finite group and S ′ is any nonempty subset of S  such that a  ⊕  b
∈  S ′ for all a , b  ∈  S ′, then ( S ′, ⊕ ) is a subgroup of ( S , ⊕ ).
▪
For example, the set {0, 2, 4, 6} forms a subgroup of ℤ8 , since it is
nonempty and closed under the operation + (that is, it is closed under +8 ).
The following theorem, whose proof is omitted, provides an extremely
useful constraint on the size of a subgroup.
Theorem 31.15 (Lagrange’ s theorem)
If ( S , ⊕ ) is a finite group and ( S ′, ⊕ ) is a subgroup of ( S , ⊕ ), then | S ′| is a
divisor of | S |.
▪
A subgroup S ′ of a group S  is a proper  subgroup if S ′ ≠ S . W e’ll use the
following corollary in the analysis in Section 31.8  of the Miller -Rabin
primality test procedure.
Corollary 31.16
If S ′ is a proper subgroup of a finite group S , then | S ′| ≤ | S |/2.
▪
Subgr oups generated by an element
Theorem 31.14 af fords us a straightforward way to produce a subgroup of a
finite group ( S , ⊕ ): choose an element a  and take all elements that can be
generated from a  using the group operation. Specifically , define a( k ) for k  ≥
1 by
For example, taking a  = 2 in the group ℤ6  yields the sequence
a(1), a(2), a(3), … = 2, 4, 0, 2, 4, 0, 2, 4, 0, ….
Page number: 1079
W e have a( k ) = ka  mod n  in the group ℤn , and a( k ) = ak mod n  in the group 
. W e define the subgroup generated by a , denoted 〈 a〉  or ( 〈 a〉 , ⊕ ), by
〈 a〉  = { a( k ) : k  ≥ 1}.
W e say that a  generates  the subgroup 〈 a〉  or that a  is a generator  of 〈 a〉 .
Since S  is finite, 〈 a〉  is a finite subset of S , possibly including all of S . Since
the associativity of ⊕  implies
a( i ) ⊕  a( j ) = a( i + j ),
〈 a〉  is closed and therefore, by Theorem 31.14, 〈 a〉  is a subgroup of S . For
example, in ℤ6 , we have
〈 0〉 = {0},
〈 1〉 = {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5},
〈 2〉 = {0, 2, 4}.
Similarly , in 
 , we have
〈 1〉 = {1},
〈 2〉 = {1, 2, 4},
〈 3〉 = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6}.
The order  of a  (in the group S ), denoted ord( a ), is defined as the
smallest positive integer t  such that a( t ) = e . (Recall that e  ∈  S  is the group
identity .)
Theorem 31.17
For any finite group ( S , ⊕ ) and any a  ∈  S , the order of a  is equal to the size
of the subgroup it generates, or ord( a ) = | 〈 a〉 |.
Proof    Let t  = ord( a ). Since a( t ) = e  and a( t + k ) = a( t ) ⊕  a( k ) = a( k ) for k  ≥ 1, if
i  > t , then a( i ) = a( j ) for some j  < i . Therefore, as we generate elements by a ,
we see no new elements after a( t ). Thus, 〈 a〉  = { a(1), a(2), …, a( t )}, and so |
〈 a〉 | ≤ t . T o show that | 〈 a〉 | ≥ t , we show that each element of the sequence
a(1), a(2), …, a( t ) is distinct. Suppose for the purpose of contradiction that
a( i ) = a( j ) for some i  and j  satisfying 1 ≤ i  < j  ≤ t . Then, a( i + k ) = a( j + k ) for k  ≥
0. But this equation implies that a( i +( t – j )) = a( j +( t – j )) = e , a contradiction, since
Page number: 1080
i  + ( t  – j ) < t  but t  is the least positive value such that a( t ) = e . Therefore,
each element of the sequence a(1), a(2), …, a( t ) is distinct, and | 〈 a〉 | ≥ t . W e
conclude that ord( a ) = | 〈 a〉 |.
▪
Corollary 31.18
The sequence a(1), a(2), … is periodic with period t  = ord( a ), that is, a( i ) =
a( j ) if and only if i  = j  (mod t ).
▪
Consistent with the above corollary , we define a(0) as e  and a( i ) as a( i  mod
t ), where t  = ord( a ), for all integers i .
Corollary 31.19
If ( S , ⊕ ) is a finite group with identity e , then for all a  ∈  S ,
a(| S |) = e .
Proof    Lagrange’ s theorem (Theorem 31.15) implies that ord( a ) | | S |, and so
| S | = 0 (mod t ), where t  = ord( a ). Therefore, a(| S |) = a(0) = e .
▪
Exer cises
31.3-1
Draw the group operation tables for the groups ( ℤ4 , +4 ) and 
 . Show
that these groups are isomorphic by exhibiting a one-to-one correspondence
f  between ℤ4  and 
  such that a + b  = c  (mod 4) if and only if f ( a )· f ( b ) = f ( c )
(mod 5).
31.3-2
List all subgroups of ℤ9  and of 
 .
31.3-3
Prove Theorem 31.14.
31.3-4
Show that if p  is prime and e  is a positive integer , then
Page number: 1081
ϕ ( pe) = pe –1( p  – 1).
31.3-5
Show that for any integer n  > 1 and for any 
 , the function 
defined by fa ( x ) = ax  mod n  is a permutation of 
 .
31.4    Solving modular linear equations
W e now consider the problem of finding solutions to the equation
where a  > 0 and n  > 0. This problem has several applications. For example,
we’ll use it in Section 31.7  as part of the procedure to find keys in the RSA
public-key cryptosystem. W e assume that a , b , and n  are given, and we wish
to find all values of x , modulo n , that satisfy equation (31.26). The equation
may have zero, one, or more than one such solution.
Let 〈 a〉  denote the subgroup of ℤn  generated by a . Since 〈 a〉  = { a( x ) : x  >
0} = { ax  mod n  : x  > 0}, equation (31.26) has a solution if and only if [ b ] ∈
〈 a〉 . Lagrange’ s theorem (Theorem 31.15) tells us that | 〈 a〉 | must be a divisor
of n . The following theorem gives us a precise characterization of 〈 a〉 .
Theorem 31.20
For any positive integers a  and n , if d  = gcd( a , n ), then we have
〈 a〉 =〈 d〉
= {0, d , 2 d , …, (( n / d ) – 1) d }
in ℤn , and thus
|〈 a〉 | = n / d .
Proof    W e begin by showing that d  ∈  〈 a〉 . Recall that E XTENDED -E UCLID ( a ,
n ) returns a triple ( d , x , y ) such that ax  + ny  = d . Thus, ax  = d  (mod n ), so
that d  ∈  〈 a〉 . In other words, d  is a multiple of a  in ℤn .
Since d  ∈  〈 a〉 , it follows that every multiple of d  belongs to 〈 a〉 , because
any multiple of a multiple of a  is itself a multiple of a . Thus, 〈 a〉  contains
every element in {0, d , 2 d , …, (( n / d ) – 1) d }. That is, 〈 d〉  ⊆  〈 a〉 .
Page number: 1082
W e now show that 〈 a〉  ⊆  〈 d〉 . If m  ∈  〈 a〉 , then m  = ax  mod n  for some
integer x , and so m  = ax  + ny  for some integer y . Because d  = gcd( a , n ), we
know that d  | a  and d  | n , and so d  | m  by equation (31.4). Therefore, m  ∈
〈 d〉 .
Combining these results, we have that 〈 a〉  = 〈 d〉 . T o see that | 〈 a〉 | = n / d ,
observe that there are exactly n / d  multiples of d  between 0 and n  – 1,
inclusive.
▪
Corollary 31.21
The equation ax  = b  (mod n ) is solvable for the unknown x  if and only if d  |
b , where d  = gcd( a , n ).
Proof    The equation ax  = b  (mod n ) is solvable if and only if [ b ] ∈  〈 a〉 ,
which is the same as saying
( b  mod n ) ∈  {0, d , 2 d , …, (( n / d ) – 1) d },
by Theorem 31.20. If 0 ≤ b  < n , then b  ∈  〈 a〉  if and only if d  | b , since the
members of 〈 a〉  are precisely the multiples of d . If b  < 0 or b  ≥ n , the
corollary then follows from the observation that d  | b  if and only if d  | ( b
mod n ), since b  and b  mod n  dif fer by a multiple of n , which is itself a
multiple of d .
▪
Corollary 31.22
The equation ax  = b  (mod n ) either has d  distinct solutions modulo n , where
d  = gcd( a , n ), or it has no solutions.
Proof    If ax  = b  (mod n ) has a solution, then b  ∈  〈 a〉 . By Theorem 31.17,
ord( a ) = | 〈 a〉 |, and so Corollary 31.18 and Theorem 31.20 imply that the
sequence ai  mod n , for i  = 0, 1, …, is periodic with period | 〈 a〉 | = n / d . If b  ∈
〈 a〉 , then b  appears exactly d  times in the sequence ai  mod n , for i  = 0, 1, …,
n  – 1, since the length-( n / d ) block of values 〈 a〉  repeats exactly d  times as i
increases from 0 to n –1. The indices x  of the d  positions for which ax  mod n
= b  are the solutions of the equation ax  = b  (mod n ).
▪
Theorem 31.23
Page number: 1083
Let d  = gcd( a , n ), and suppose that d  = ax ′ + ny ′ for some integers x ′ and y ′
(for example, as computed by E XTENDED -E UCLID ). If d  | b , then the equation
ax  = b  (mod n ) has as one of its solutions the value x0 , where
x0  = x ′( b / d ) mod n .
Proof    W e have
ax 0 = ax ′( b / d ) (mod n )
= d ( b / d ) (mod n ) (because ax ′ = d  (mod n ))
= b (mod n ),
and thus x0  is a solution to ax  = b  (mod n ).
▪
Theorem 31.24
Suppose that the equation ax  = b  (mod n ) is solvable (that is, d  | b , where d
= gcd( a , n )) and that x0  is any solution to this equation. Then, this equation
has exactly d  distinct solutions, modulo n , given by xi  = x0  + i ( n / d ) for i  = 0,
1, …, d  – 1.
Proof    Because n / d  > 0 and 0 ≤ i ( n / d ) < n  for i  = 0, 1, …, d  – 1, the values
x0 , x1 , …, xd –1  are all distinct, modulo n . Since x0  is a solution of ax  = b
(mod n ), we have ax0  mod n  = b  (mod n ). Thus, for i  = 0, 1, …, d  – 1, we
have
ax i  mod n = a ( x 0  + in / d ) mod n
= ( ax 0  + ain / d ) mod n
= ax 0  mod n  (because d  | a  implies that ain / d  is a multiple of n )
= b  (mod n ),
and hence axi  = b  (mod n ), making xi  a solution, too. By Corollary 31.22,
the equation ax  = b  (mod n ) has exactly d  solutions, so that x0 , x1 , …, xd –1
must be all of them.
▪
W e have now developed the mathematics needed to solve the equation
ax  = b  (mod n ). The procedure M ODULAR -L INEAR -E QUA TION -S OL VER  prints
Page number: 1084
all solutions to this equation. The inputs a  and n  are arbitrary positive
integers, and b  is an arbitrary integer .
M ODULAR -L INEAR -E QUA TION -S OL VER ( a , b , n )
1 ( d , x ′, y ′) = E XTENDED -E UCLID ( a , n )
2 if  d  | b
3 x 0  = x ′( b / d ) mod n
4 for  i  = 0 to  d  – 1
5 print ( x 0  + i ( n / d )) mod n
6 else  print “no solutions”
As an example of the operation of M ODULAR -L INEAR -E QUA TION -S OL VER ,
consider the equation 14 x  = 30 (mod 100) (and thus a  = 14, b  = 30, and n  =
100). Calling E XTENDED -E UCLID  in line 1 gives ( d , x ′, y ′) = (2, –7, 1). Since
2 | 30, lines 3–5 execute. Line 3 computes x0  = (–7)(15) mod 100 = 95. The
for  loop of lines 4–5 prints the two solutions, 95 and 45.
The procedure M ODULAR -L INEAR -E QUA TION -S OL VER  works as follows.
The call to E XTENDED -E UCLID  in line 1 returns a triple ( d , x ′, y ′) such that d
= gcd( a , n ) and d  = ax ′ + ny ′. Therefore, x ′ is a solution to the equation ax ′ =
d  (mod n ). If d  does not divide b , then the equation ax  = b  (mod n ) has no
solution, by Corollary 31.21. Line 2 checks to see whether d  | b , and if not,
line 6 reports that there are no solutions. Otherwise, line 3 computes a
solution x0  to ax  = b  (mod n ), as Theorem 31.23 suggests. Given one
solution, Theorem 31.24 states that adding multiples of ( n / d ), modulo n ,
yields the other d  – 1 solutions. The for  loop of lines 4–5 prints out all d
solutions, beginning with x0  and spaced n / d  apart, modulo n .
M ODULAR -L INEAR -E QUA TION -S OL VER  performs O (1g n  + gcd( a , n ))
arithmetic operations, since E XTENDED -E UCLID  performs O (1g n ) arithmetic
operations, and each iteration of the for  loop of lines 4–5 performs a
constant number of arithmetic operations.
The following corollaries of Theorem 31.24 give specializations of
particular interest.
Corollary 31.25
For any n  > 1, if gcd( a , n ) = 1, then the equation ax  = b  (mod n ) has a
unique solution, modulo n .
▪
Page number: 1085
If b  = 1, a common case of considerable interest, the x  that solves the
equation is a multiplicative inverse  of a , modulo n .
Corollary 31.26
For any n  > 1, if gcd( a , n ) = 1, then the equation ax  = 1 (mod n ) has a
unique solution, modulo n . Otherwise, it has no solution.
▪
Thanks to Corollary 31.26, the notation a−1 mod n  refers to the
multiplicative inverse of a , modulo n , when a  and n  are relatively prime. If
gcd( a , n ) = 1, then the unique solution to the equation ax  = 1 (mod n ) is the
integer x  returned by E XTENDED -E UCLID , since the equation
gcd( a , n ) = 1 = ax  + ny
implies ax  = 1 (mod n ). Thus, E XTENDED -E UCLID  can compute a−1 mod n
ef ficiently .
Exer cises
31.4-1
Find all solutions to the equation 35 x  = 10 (mod 50).
31.4-2
Prove that the equation ax  = ay  (mod n ) implies x  = y  (mod n ) whenever
gcd( a , n ) = 1. Show that the condition gcd( a , n ) = 1 is necessary by
supplying a counterexample with gcd( a , n ) > 1.
31.4-3
Consider the following change to line 3 of the procedure M ODULAR -L INEAR -
E QUA TION -S OL VER :
 
3 x 0  = x ′( b / d ) mod ( n / d )
W ith this change, will the procedure still work? Explain why or why not.
★  31.4-4
Let p  be prime and f ( x ) = ( f0  + f1 x  + ⋯  + ft xt) (mod p ) be a polynomial of
degree t , with coef ficients fi  drawn from ℤp . W e say that a  ∈  ℤp  is a zero  of
f  if f ( a ) = 0 (mod p ). Prove that if a  is a zero of f , then f ( x ) = ( x  – a ) g ( x )
Page number: 1086
(mod p ) for some polynomial g ( x ) of degree t  – 1. Prove by induction on t
that if p  is prime, then a polynomial f ( x ) of degree t  can have at most t
distinct zeros modulo p .
31.5    The Chinese r emainder theor em
Around 100 C . E ., the Chinese mathematician Sun-T s ŭ  solved the problem of
finding those integers x  that leave remainders 2, 3, and 2 when divided by 3,
5, and 7 respectively . One such solution is x  = 23, and all solutions are of
the form 23+105 k  for arbitrary integers k . The “Chinese remainder
theorem” provides a correspondence between a system of equations modulo
a set of pairwise relatively prime moduli (for example, 3, 5, and 7) and an
equation modulo their product (for example, 105).
The Chinese remainder theorem has two major applications. Let the
integer n  be factored as n  = n1 n2  ⋯  nk , where the factors ni  are pairwise
relatively prime. First, the Chinese remainder theorem is a descriptive
“structure theorem” that describes the structure of ℤn  as identical to that of
the Cartesian product 
  with componentwise addition and
multiplication modulo ni  in the i th component. Second, this description
helps in designing ef ficient algorithms, since working in each of the
systems 
  can be more ef ficient (in terms of bit operations) than working
modulo n .
Theorem 31.27 (Chinese remainder theorem)
Let n  = n1 n2  ⋯  nk , where the ni  are pairwise relatively prime. Consider the
correspondence
where 
 , and
ai  = a  mod ni
for i  = 1, 2, …, k . Then, mapping (31.27) is a one-to-one mapping
(bijection) between ℤn  and the Cartesian product 
 .
Operations performed on the elements of ℤn  can be equivalently performed
on the corresponding k -tuples by performing the operations independently
in each coordinate position in the appropriate system. That is, if
Page number: 1087
a ↔ ( a 1 , a 2 , …, a k ),
b ↔ ( b 1 , b 2 , …, b k ),
then
Proof    Let’ s see how to translate between the two representations. Going
from a  to ( a1 , a2 , …, ak ) requires only k  “mod” operations. The reverse—
computing a  from inputs ( a1 , a2 , …, ak )—is only slightly more
complicated.
W e begin by defining mi  = n / ni  for i  = 1, 2, …, k . Thus, mi  is the product
of all of the nj ’ s other than ni : mi  = n1 n2  ⋯  ni −1 ni +1  ⋯  nk . W e next define
for i  = 1, 2, …, k . Equation (31.31) is well defined: since mi  and ni  are
relatively prime (by Theorem 31.6), Corollary 31.26 guarantees that 
mod ni  exists. Here is how to compute a  as a function of the ai  and ci :
W e now show that equation (31.32) ensures that a  = ai  (mod ni ) for i  = 1,
2, …, k . If j  ≠ i , then mj  = 0 (mod ni ), which implies that cj  = mj  = 0 (mod
ni ). Note also that ci  = 1 (mod ni ), from equation (31.31). W e thus have the
appealing and useful correspondence
ci  ↔ (0, 0, …, 0, 1, 0, …, 0),
a vector that has 0s everywhere except in the i th coordinate, where it has a
1. The ci  thus form a “basis” for the representation, in a certain sense. For
each i , therefore, we have

Page number: 1088
which is what we wished to show: our method of computing a  from the ai ’ s
produces a result a  that satisfies the constraints a  = ai  (mod ni ) for i  = 1, 2,
…, k . The correspondence is one-to-one, since we can transform in both
directions. Finally , equations (31.28)–(31.30) follow directly from Exercise
31.1-7, since x  mod ni  = ( x  mod n ) mod ni  for any x  and i  = 1, 2, …, k .
▪
W e’ll use the following corollaries later in this chapter .
Corollary 31.28
If n1 , n2 , …, nk  are pairwise relatively prime and n  = n1 n2  ⋯  nk , then for
any integers a1 , a2 , …, ak , the set of simultaneous equations
x  = a i (mod n i ),
for i  = 1, 2, …, k , has a unique solution modulo n  for the unknown x .
▪
Corollary 31.29
If n1 , n2 , …, nk  are pairwise relatively prime and n  = n1 n2  ⋯  nk , then for all
integers x  and a ,
x  = a  (mod ni )
for i  = 1, 2, …, k  if and only if
x  = a  (mod n ).
▪
As an example of the application of the Chinese remainder theorem,
suppose that you are given the two equations
a  = 2 (mod 5),
a  = 3 (mod 13),
so that a1  = 2, n1  = m2  = 5, a2  = 3, and n2  = m1  = 13, and you wish to
compute a  mod 65, since n  = n1 n2  = 65. Because 13−1 = 2 (mod 5) and 5−1
= 8 (mod 13), you compute
c 1 = 13 · (2 mod 5) = 26,
Page number: 1089
c 2 = 5 · (8 mod 13) = 40,
and
a = 2 · 26 + 3 · 40 (mod 65)
= 52 + 120 (mod 65)
= 42 (mod 65).
Figur e 31.3  An illustration of the Chinese remainder theorem for n 1  = 5 and n 2  = 13. For this
example, c 1  = 26 and c 2  = 40. In row i , column j  is shown the value of a , modulo 65, such that a  mod
5 = i  and a  mod 13 = j . Note that row 0, column 0 contains a 0. Similarly , row 4, column 12 contains
a 64 (equivalent to −1). Since c 1  = 26, moving down a row increases a  by 26. Similarly , c 2  = 40
means that moving right by a column increases a  by 40. Increasing a  by 1 corresponds to moving
diagonally downward and to the right, wrapping around from the bottom to the top and from the right
to the left.
See Figure 31.3  for an illustration of the Chinese remainder theorem,
modulo 65.
Thus, you can work modulo n  by working modulo n  directly or by
working in the transformed representation using separate modulo ni
computations, as convenient. The computations are entirely equivalent.
Exer cises
31.5-1
Find all solutions to the equations x  = 4 (mod 5) and x  = 5 (mod 1 1).
31.5-2
Find all integers x  that leave remainders 1, 2, and 3 when divided by 9, 8,
and 7, respectively .
31.5-3
Ar gue that, under the definitions of Theorem 31.27, if gcd( a , n ) = 1, then

Page number: 1090
31.5-4
Under the definitions of Theorem 31.27, prove that for any polynomial f ,
the number of roots of the equation f ( x ) = 0 (mod n ) equals the product of
the number of roots of each of the equations f ( x ) = 0 (mod n1 ), f ( x ) = 0 (mod
n2 ), …, f ( x ) = 0 (mod nk ).
31.6    Powers of an element
Along with considering the multiples of a given element a , modulo n , we
often consider the sequence of powers of a , modulo n , where 
 :
a0, a1, a2, a3, …,
modulo n . Indexing from 0, the 0th value in this sequence is a0 mod n  = 1,
and the i th value is ai mod n . For example, the powers of 3 modulo 7 are
and the powers of 2 modulo 7 are
In this section, let 〈 a〉  denote the subgroup of 
  generated by a  through
repeated multiplication, and let ordn ( a ) (the “order of a , modulo n ”) denote
the order of a  in 
 . For example, 〈 2〉  = {1, 2, 4} in 
 , and ord7 (2) = 3.
Using the definition of the Euler phi function ϕ ( n ) as the size of 
  (see
Section 31.3 ), we now translate Corollary 31.19 into the notation of 
  to
obtain Euler ’ s theorem and specialize it to 
 , where p  is prime, to obtain
Fermat’ s theorem.
Theorem 31.30 (Euler ’ s theorem)
For any integer n  > 1,
▪
Theorem 31.31 (Fermat’ s theorem)
If p  is prime, then
Page number: 1091
Proof    By equation (31.22), ϕ ( p ) = p  – 1 if p  is prime.
▪
Fermat’ s theorem applies to every element in ℤp  except 0, since 
 .
For all a  ∈  ℤp , however , we have ap = a  (mod p ) if p  is prime.
If 
 , then every element in 
  is a power of g , modulo n , and
g  is a primitive root  or a generator  of 
 . For example, 3 is a primitive root,
modulo 7, but 2 is not a primitive root, modulo 7. If 
  possesses a
primitive root, the group 
  is cyclic . W e omit the proof of the following
theorem, which is proven by Niven and Zuckerman [ 345 ].
Theorem 31.32
The values of n  > 1 for which 
  is cyclic are 2, 4, pe, and 2 pe, for all
primes p  > 2 and all positive integers e .
▪
If g  is a primitive root of 
  and a  is any element of 
 , then there exists
a z  such that gz = a  (mod n ). This z  is a discrete logarithm  or an index  of a ,
modulo n , to the base g . W e denote this value as indn , g ( a ).
Theorem 31.33 (Discrete logarithm theorem)
If g  is a primitive root of 
 , then the equation gx = gy (mod n ) holds if and
only if the equation x  = y  (mod ϕ ( n )) holds.
Proof    Suppose first that x  = y  (mod ϕ ( n )). Then, we have x  = y  + k ϕ ( n ) for
some integer k , and thus
gx= gy + k ϕ ( n ) (mod n )
= gy · ( gϕ ( n ))k (mod n )
= gy · 1k (mod n ) (by Euler ’ s theorem)
= gy (mod n ).
Conversely , suppose that gx = gy (mod n ). Because the sequence of powers
of g  generates every element of 〈 g〉  and | 〈 g〉 | = ϕ ( n ), Corollary 31.18 implies
that the sequence of powers of g  is periodic with period ϕ ( n ). Therefore, if
gx = gy (mod n ), we must have x  = y  (mod ϕ ( n )).
Page number: 1092
▪
Let’ s now turn our attention to the square roots of 1, modulo a prime
power . The following properties will be useful to justify the primality-
testing algorithm in Section 31.8 .
Theorem 31.34
If p  is an odd prime and e  ≥ 1, then the equation
has only two solutions, namely x  = 1 and x  = −1.
Proof    By Exercise 31.6-2, equation (31.33) is equivalent to
pe | ( x  − 1)( x  + 1).
Since p  > 2, we can have p  | ( x  − 1) or p  | ( x  + 1), but not both. (Otherwise,
by property (31.3), p  would also divide their dif ference ( x  + 1) – ( x  − 1) =
2.) If p  ∤  ( x  – 1), then gcd( pe, x  − 1) = 1, and by Corollary 31.5, we would
have pe | ( x  + 1). That is, x  = −1 (mod pe). Symmetrically , if p  ∤  ( x  + 1), then
gcd( pe, x  + 1) = 1, and Corollary 31.5 implies that pe | ( x  − 1), so that x  = 1
(mod pe). Therefore, either x  = −1 (mod pe) or x  = 1 (mod pe).
▪
A number x  is a nontrivial square root of  1, modulo n , if it satisfies the
equation x2 = 1 (mod n ) but x  is equivalent to neither of the two “trivial”
square roots: 1 or −1, modulo n . For example, 6 is a nontrivial square root
of 1, modulo 35. W e’ll use the following corollary to Theorem 31.34 in
Section 31.8  to prove the Miller -Rabin primality-testing procedure correct.
Corollary 31.35
If there exists a nontrivial square root of 1, modulo n , then n  is composite.
Proof    By the contrapositive of Theorem 31.34, if there exists a nontrivial
square root of 1, modulo n , then n  cannot be an odd prime or a power of an
odd prime. Nor can n  be 2, because if x2 = 1 (mod 2), then x  = 1 (mod 2),
and therefore, all square roots of 1, modulo 2, are trivial. Thus, n  cannot be
prime. Finally , we must have n  > 1 for a nontrivial square root of 1 to exist.
Therefore, n  must be composite.
▪
Page number: 1093
Raising to powers with r epeated squaring
A frequently occurring operation in number -theoretic computations is
raising one number to a power modulo another number , also known as
modular exponentiation . More precisely , we would like an ef ficient way to
compute ab mod n , where a  and b  are nonnegative integers and n  is a
positive integer . Modular exponentiation is an essential operation in many
primality-testing routines and in the RSA public-key cryptosystem. The
method of repeated squaring  solves this problem ef ficiently .
Repeated squaring is based on the following formula to compute ab for
nonnegative integers a  and b :
The last case, where b  is odd, reduces to the one of the first two cases,
since if b  is odd, then b  − 1 is even. The recursive procedure M ODULAR -
E XPONENTIA TION  on the next page computes ab mod n  using equation
(31.34), but performing all computations modulo n . The term “repeated
squaring” comes from squaring the intermediate result d  = ab /2 in line 5.
Figure 31.4  shows the values of the parameter b , the local variable d , and
the value returned at each level of the recursion for the call M ODULAR -
E XPONENTIA TION (7,560,561), which returns the result 1.
Figur e 31.4  The values of the parameter b , the local variable d , and the value returned for recursive
calls of M ODULAR -E XPONENTIA TION  with parameter values a  = 7, b  = 560, and n  = 561. The
value returned by each recursive call is assigned directly to d . The result of the call with a  = 7, b  =
560, and n  = 561 is 1.
M ODULAR -E XPONENTIA TION ( a , b , n )
1 if  b  == 0
2 r eturn  1
3 elseif  b  mod 2 == 0
4 d  = M ODULAR -E XPONENTIA TION ( a , b /2, n ) //  b  is even
5 r eturn  ( d  · d ) mod n
6 else  d  = M ODULAR -E XPONENTIA TION ( a , b  − 1, n ) //  b  is odd
Page number: 1094
7 r eturn  ( a  · d ) mod n
The total number of recursive calls depends on the number of bits of b
and the values of these bits. Assume that b  > 0 and that the most significant
bit of b  is a 1. Each 0 generates one recursive call (in line 4), and each 1
generates two recursive calls (one in line 6 followed by one in line 4
because if b  is odd, then b  − 1 is even). If the inputs a , b , and n  are β -bit
numbers, then there are between β  and 2 β  − 1 recursive calls altogether , the
total number of arithmetic operations required is O ( β ), and the total number
of bit operations required is O ( β3).
Exer cises
31.6-1
Draw a table showing the order of every element in 
 . Pick the smallest
primitive root g  and compute a table giving ind1 1, g ( x ) for all 
 .
31.6-2
Show that x2 = 1 (mod pe) is equivalent to pe | ( x  − 1)( x  + 1).
31.6-3
Rewrite the third case of M ODULAR -E XPONENTIA TION , where b  is odd, so
that if b  has β  bits and the most significant bit is 1, then there are always
exactly β  recursive calls.
31.6-4
Give a nonrecursive (i.e., iterative) version of M ODULAR -E XPONENTIA TION .
31.6-5
Assuming that you know ϕ ( n ), explain how to compute a−1 mod n  for any 
 using the procedure M ODULAR -E XPONENTIA TION .
31.7    The RSA public-key cryptosystem
W ith a public-key cryptosystem, you can encrypt  messages sent between
two communicating parties so that an eavesdropper who overhears the
encrypted messages will not be able to decode, or decrypt , them. A public-
key cryptosystem also enables a party to append an unfor geable “digital
Page number: 1095
signature” to the end of an electronic message. Such a signature is the
electronic version of a handwritten signature on a paper document. It can be
easily checked by anyone, for ged by no one, yet loses its validity if any bit
of the message is altered. It therefore provides authentication of both the
identity of the signer and the contents of the signed message. It is the
perfect tool for electronically signed business contracts, electronic checks,
electronic purchase orders, and other electronic communications that parties
wish to authenticate.
The RSA public-key cryptosystem relies on the dramatic dif ference
between the ease of finding lar ge prime numbers and the dif ficulty of
factoring the product of two lar ge prime numbers. Section 31.8  describes an
ef ficient procedure for finding lar ge prime numbers.
Public-key cryptosystems
In a public-key cryptosystem, each participant has both a public key  and a
secret key . Each key is a piece of information. For example, in the RSA
cryptosystem, each key consists of a pair of integers. The participants
“Alice” and “Bob” are traditionally used in cryptography examples. W e
denote the public keys for Alice and Bob as PA  and PB , respectively , and
likewise the secret keys are SA  for Alice and SB  for Bob.
Each participant creates his or her own public and secret keys. Secret
keys are kept secret, but public keys can be revealed to anyone or even
published. In fact, it is often convenient to assume that everyone’ s public
key is available in a public directory , so that any participant can easily
obtain the public key of any other participant.
Figur e 31.5  Encryption in a public key system. Bob encrypts the message M  using Alice’ s public key
P A  and transmits the resulting ciphertext C  = P A ( M ) over a communication channel to Alice. An
eavesdropper who captures the transmitted ciphertext gains no information about M . Alice receives C
and decrypts it using her secret key to obtain the original message M  = S A ( C ).
Page number: 1096
The public and secret keys specify functions that can be applied to any
message. Let D  denote the set of permissible messages. For example, D
might be the set of all finite-length bit sequences. The simplest, and
original, formulation of public-key cryptography requires one-to-one
functions from D  to itself, based on the public and secret keys. W e denote
the function based on Alice’ s public key PA  by PA () and the function based
on her secret key SA  by SA (). The functions PA () and SA () are thus
permutations of D . W e assume that the functions PA () and SA () are
ef ficiently computable given the corresponding keys PA  and SA .
The public and secret keys for any participant are a “matched pair” in
that they specify functions that are inverses of each other . That is,
for any message M  ∈  D . T ransforming M  with the two keys PA  and SA
successively , in either order , yields back the original message M .
A public-key cryptosystem requires that Alice, and only Alice, be able
to compute the function SA () in any practical amount of time. This
assumption is crucial to keeping encrypted messages sent to Alice private
and to knowing that Alice’ s digital signatures are authentic. Alice must
keep her key SA  secret. If she does not, whoever else has access to SA  can
decrypt messages intended only for Alice and can also for ge her digital
signature. The assumption that only Alice can reasonably compute SA ()
must hold even though everyone knows PA  and can compute PA (), the
inverse function to SA (), ef ficiently . These requirements appear formidable,
but we’ll see how to satisfy them.
In a public-key cryptosystem, encryption works as shown in Figure 31.5 .
Suppose that Bob wishes to send Alice a message M  encrypted so that it
looks like
Page number: 1097
Figur e 31.6  Digital signatures in a public-key system. Alice signs the message M ′ by appending her
digital signature σ  = S A ( M ′) to it. She transmits the message/signature pair ( M ′, σ ) to Bob, who
verifies it by checking the equation M ′ = P A ( σ ). If the equation holds, he accepts ( M ′, σ ) as a message
that Alice has signed.
unintelligible gibberish to an eavesdropper . The scenario for sending the
message goes as follows.
Bob obtains Alice’ s public key PA , perhaps from a public directory or
perhaps directly from Alice.
Bob computes the ciphertext  C  = PA ( M ) corresponding to the
message M  and sends C  to Alice.
When Alice receives the ciphertext C , she applies her secret key SA  to
retrieve the original message: SA ( C ) = SA ( PA ( M )) = M .
Because SA () and PA () are inverse functions, Alice can compute M  from C .
Because only Alice is able to compute SA (), only Alice can compute M  from
C . Because Bob encrypts M  using PA (), only Alice can understand the
transmitted message.
Digital signatures can be implemented within this formulation of a
public-key cryptosystem. (There are other ways to construct digital
signatures, but we won’ t go into them here.) Suppose now that Alice wishes
to send Bob a digitally signed response M ′. Figure 31.6  shows how the
digital-signature scenario proceeds.
Alice computes her digital signature  σ  for the message M ′ using her
secret key SA  and the equation σ  = SA ( M ′).
Alice sends the message/signature pair ( M ′, σ ) to Bob.
Page number: 1098
When Bob receives ( M ′, σ ), he can verify that it originated from Alice
by using Alice’ s public key to verify the equation M ′ = PA ( σ ).
(Presumably , M ′ contains Alice’ s name, so that Bob knows whose
public key to use.) If the equation holds, then Bob concludes that the
message M ′ was actually signed by Alice. If the equation fails to
hold, Bob concludes either that the information he received was
corrupted by transmission errors or that the pair ( M ′, σ ) is an
attempted for gery .
Because a digital signature provides both authentication of the signer ’ s
identity and authentication of the contents of the signed message, it is
analogous to a handwritten signature at the end of a written document.
A digital signature must be verifiable by anyone who has access to the
signer ’ s public key . A signed message can be verified by one party and then
passed on to other parties who can also verify the signature. For example,
the message might be an electronic check from Alice to Bob. After Bob
verifies Alice’ s signature on the check, he can give the check to his bank,
who can then also verify the signature and ef fect the appropriate funds
transfer .
A signed message may or may not be encrypted. The message can be “in
the clear” and not protected from disclosure. By composing the above
protocols for encryption and for signatures, Alice can create a message to
Bob that is both signed and encrypted. Alice first appends her digital
signature to the message and then encrypts the resulting message/signature
pair with Bob’ s public key . Bob decrypts the received message with his
secret key to obtain both the original message and its digital signature. Bob
can then verify the signature using Alice’ s public key . The corresponding
combined process using paper -based systems would be to sign the paper
document and then seal the document inside a paper envelope that is
opened only by the intended recipient.
The RSA cryptosystem
In the RSA public-key cryptosystem , a participant creates a public key and a
secret key with the following procedure:
1 . Select at random two lar ge prime numbers p  and q  such that p  ≠ q .
The primes p  and q  might be, say , 1024 bits each.
Page number: 1099
2 . Compute n  = pq .
3 . Select a small odd integer e  that is relatively prime to ϕ ( n ), which,
by equation (31.21), equals ( p  – 1)( q  – 1).
4 . Compute d  as the multiplicative inverse of e , modulo ϕ ( n ).
(Corollary 31.26 guarantees that d  exists and is uniquely defined.
Y ou can use the technique of Section 31.4  to compute d , given e  and
ϕ ( n ).)
5 . Publish the pair P  = ( e , n ) as the participant’ s RSA public key .
6 . Keep secret the pair S  = ( d , n ) as the participant’ s RSA secret key .
For this scheme, the domain D  is the set ℤn . T o transform a message M
associated with a public key P  = ( e , n ), compute
T o transform a ciphertext C  associated with a secret key S  = ( d , n ), compute
These equations apply to both encryption and signatures. T o create a
signature, the signer ’ s secret key is applied to the message to be signed,
rather than to a ciphertext. T o verify a signature, the public key of the signer
is applied to the signature rather than to a message to be encrypted.
T o implement the public-key and secret-key operations (31.37) and
(31.38), you can use the procedure M ODULAR -E XPONENTIA TION  described in
Section 31.6 . T o analyze the running time of these operations, assume that
the public key ( e , n ) and secret key ( d , n ) satisfy 1g e  = O (1), 1g d  ≤ β , and
1g n  ≤ β . Then, applying a public key requires O (1) modular multiplications
and uses O ( β2) bit operations. Applying a secret key requires O ( β ) modular
multiplications, using O ( β3) bit operations.
Theorem 31.36 (Correctness of RSA)
The RSA equations (31.37) and (31.38) define inverse transformations of
ℤn  satisfying equations (31.35) and (31.36).
Proof    From equations (31.37) and (31.38), we have that for any M  ∈  ℤn ,
P ( S ( M )) = S ( P ( M )) = Med (mod n ).
Page number: 1100
Since e  and d  are multiplicative inverses modulo ϕ ( n ) = ( p  – 1)( q  – 1),
ed  = 1 + k ( p  – 1)( q  – 1)
for some integer k . But then, if M  ≠ 0 (mod p ), we have
Med= M ( Mp –1)k ( q –1) (mod p )
= M (( M  mod p )p –1)k ( q –1) (mod p )
= M (1)k ( q –1) (mod p ) (by Theorem 31.31)
= M (mod p )
Also, Med = M  (mod p ) if M  = 0 (mod p ). Thus,
Med = M  (mod p )
for all M . Similarly ,
Med = M  (mod q )
for all M . Thus, by Corollary 31.29 to the Chinese remainder theorem,
Med = M  (mod n )
for all M .
▪
The security of the RSA cryptosystem rests in lar ge part on the dif ficulty
of factoring lar ge integers. If an adversary can factor the modulus n  in a
public key , then the adversary can derive the secret key from the public key ,
using the knowledge of the factors p  and q  in the same way that the creator
of the public key used them. Therefore, if factoring lar ge integers is easy ,
then breaking the RSA cryptosystem is easy . The converse statement, that if
factoring lar ge integers is hard, then breaking RSA is hard, is unproven.
After two decades of research, however , no easier method has been found to
break the RSA public-key cryptosystem than to factor the modulus n . And
factoring lar ge integers is surprisingly dif ficult. By randomly selecting and
multiplying together two 1024-bit primes, you can create a public key that
cannot be “broken” in any feasible amount of time with current technology .
In the absence of a fundamental breakthrough in the design of number -
theoretic algorithms, and when implemented with care following
recommended standards, the RSA cryptosystem is capable of providing a
high degree of security in applications.
Page number: 1101
In order to achieve security with the RSA cryptosystem, however , you
should use integers that are quite long—more than 1000 bits—to resist
possible advances in the art of factoring. In 2021, RSA moduli are
commonly in the range of 2048 to 4096 bits. T o create moduli of such sizes,
you must find lar ge primes ef ficiently . Section 31.8  addresses this problem.
For ef ficiency , RSA is often used in a “hybrid” or “key-management”
mode with fast cryptosystems that are not public-key cryptosystems. W ith
such a symmetric-key  system, the encryption and decryption keys are
identical. If Alice wishes to send a long message M  to Bob privately , she
selects a random key K  for the fast symmetric-key cryptosystem and
encrypts M  using K , obtaining ciphertext C , where C  is as long as M , but K
is quite short. Then she encrypts K  using Bob’ s public RSA key . Since K  is
short, computing PB ( K ) is fast (much faster than computing PB ( M )). She
then transmits ( C , PB ( K )) to Bob, who decrypts PB ( K ) to obtain K  and then
uses K  to decrypt C , obtaining M .
A similar hybrid approach creates digital signatures ef ficiently . This
approach combines RSA with a public collision-resistant hash function  h
—a function that is easy to compute but for which it is computationally
infeasible to find two messages M  and M ′ such that h ( M ) = h ( M ′). The value
h ( M ) is a short (say , 256-bit) “fingerprint” of the message M . If Alice
wishes to sign a message M , she first applies h  to M  to obtain the fingerprint
h ( M ), which she then encrypts with her secret key . She sends ( M , SA ( h ( M )))
to Bob as her signed version of M . Bob can verify the signature by
computing h ( M ) and verifying that PA  applied to SA ( h ( M )) as received
equals h ( M ). Because no one can create two messages with the same
fingerprint, it is computationally infeasible to alter a signed message and
preserve the validity of the signature.
One way to distribute public keys uses certificates . For example, assume
that there is a “trusted authority” T  whose public key is known by everyone.
Alice can obtain from T  a signed message (her certificate) stating that
“Alice’ s public key is PA .” This certificate is “self-authenticating” since
everyone knows PT . Alice can include her certificate with her signed
messages, so that the recipient has Alice’ s public key immediately available
in order to verify her signature. Because her key was signed by T , the
recipient knows that Alice’ s key is really Alice’ s.
Page number: 1102
Exer cises
31.7-1
Consider an RSA key set with p  = 1 1, q  = 29, n  = 319, and e  = 3. What
value of d  should be used in the secret key? What is the encryption of the
message M  = 100?
31.7-2
Prove that if Alice’ s public exponent e  is 3 and an adversary obtains Alice’ s
secret exponent d , where 0 < d  < ϕ ( n ), then the adversary can factor Alice’ s
modulus n  in time polynomial in the number of bits in n . (Although you are
not asked to prove it, you might be interested to know that this result
remains true even if the condition e  = 3 is removed. See Miller [ 327 ].)
★  31.7-3
Prove that RSA is multiplicative in the sense that
PA ( M1 ) PA ( M2 ) = PA ( M1 M2 ) (mod n ).
Use this fact to prove that if an adversary had a procedure that could
ef ficiently decrypt 1% of messages from ℤn  encrypted with PA , then the
adversary could employ a probabilistic algorithm to decrypt every message
encrypted with PA  with high probability .
★  31.8    Primality testing
This section shows how to find lar ge primes. W e begin with a discussion of
the density of primes, proceed to examine a plausible, but incomplete,
approach to primality testing, and then present an ef fective randomized
primality test due to Miller and Rabin.
The density of prime numbers
Many applications, such as cryptography , call for finding lar ge “random”
primes. Fortunately , lar ge primes are not too rare, so that it is feasible to test
random integers of the appropriate size until you find one that is prime. The
prime distribution function  π ( n ) specifies the number of primes that are
less than or equal to n . For example, π (10) = 4, since there are 4 prime
Page number: 1103
numbers less than or equal to 10, namely , 2, 3, 5, and 7. The prime number
theorem gives a useful approximation to π ( n ).
Theorem 31.37 (Prime number theorem)
▪
The approximation n /ln n  gives reasonably accurate estimates of π ( n )
even for small n . For example, it is of f by less than 6% at n  = 109, where
π ( n ) = 50,847,534 and n /ln n  ≈ 48,254,942. (T o a number theorist, 109 is a
small number .)
The process of randomly selecting an integer n  and determining whether
it is prime is really just a Bernoulli trial (see Section C.4 ). By the prime
number theorem, the probability of a success—that is, the probability that n
is prime—is approximately 1/ln n . The geometric distribution says how
many trials must occur to obtain a success, and by equation (C.36) on page
1 197, the expected number of trials is approximately ln n . Thus, in order to
find a prime that has the same length as n  by testing integers chosen
randomly near n , the expected number examined would be approximately ln
n . For example, the expectation is that finding a 1024-bit prime would
require testing approximately ln 21024 ≈ 710 randomly chosen 1024-bit
numbers for primality . (Of course, to cut this figure in half, choose only odd
integers.)
The remainder of this section shows how to determine whether a lar ge
odd integer n  is prime. For notational convenience, we assume that n  has
the prime factorization
where r  ≥ 1, p1 , p2 , …, pr  are the prime factors of n , and e1 , e2 , …, er  are
positive integers. The integer n  is prime if and only if r  = 1 and e1  = 1.
One simple approach to the problem of testing for primality is trial
division : try dividing n  by each integer 2, 3, 5, 7, 9, …, 
 , skipping even
integers greater than 2. W e can conclude that n  is prime if and only if none
of the trial divisors divides n . Assuming that each trial division takes
constant time, the worst-case running time is 
 , which is exponential in
Page number: 1104
the length of n . (Recall that if n  is encoded in binary using β  bits, then β  =
⌈ 1g( n  + 1) ⌉ , and so 
 .) Thus, trial division works well only if n  is
very small or happens to have a small prime factor . When it works, trial
division has the advantage that it not only determines whether n  is prime or
composite, it also determines one of n ’ s prime factors if n  is composite.
This section focuses on finding out whether a given number n  is prime.
If n  is composite, we won’ t worry about finding its prime factorization.
Computing the prime factorization of a number is computationally
expensive. Y ou might be surprised that it turns out to be much easier to
ascertain whether a given number is prime than it is to determine the prime
factorization of the number if it is not prime.
Pseudoprimality testing
W e’ll start with a method for primality testing that “almost works” and, in
fact, is good enough for many practical applications. Later on, we’ll refine
this method to remove the small defect. Let 
  denote the nonzero elements
of ℤn :
If n  is prime, then 
 .
W e say that n  is a base-a pseudoprime  if n  is composite and
Fermat’ s theorem (Theorem 31.31 on page 932) implies that if n  is prime,
then n  satisfies equation (31.39) for every a  in 
 . Thus, if there is any 
 such that n  does not  satisfy equation (31.39), then n  is certainly
composite. Surprisingly , the converse almost  holds, so that this criterion
forms an almost perfect test for primality . Instead of trying every value of 
, test to see whether n  satisfies equation (31.39) for just a  = 2. If not,
then declare n  to be composite by returning COMPOSITE . Otherwise, return
PRIME , guessing that n  is prime (when, in fact, all we know is that n  is either
prime or a base-2 pseudoprime).
The procedure P SEUDOPRIME  on the next page pretends in this manner to
check whether n  is prime. It uses the procedure M ODULAR -E XPONENTIA TION
from Section 31.6 . It assumes that the input n  is an odd integer greater than
2. This procedure can make errors, but only of one type. That is, if it says
Page number: 1105
that n  is composite, then it is always correct. If it says that n  is prime,
however , then it makes an error only if n  is a base-2 pseudoprime.
How often does P SEUDOPRIME  err? Surprisingly rarely . There are only 22
values of n  less than 10,000 for which it errs, the first four of which are 341,
561, 645,
P SEUDOPRIME ( n )
1 if  M ODULAR -E XPONENTIA TION (2, n  – 1, n ) ≠ 1 (mod n )
2 r eturn  COMPOSITE //  definitely
3 else r eturn  PRIME //  we hope!
and 1 105. W e won’ t prove it, but the probability that this program makes an
error on a randomly chosen β -bit number goes to 0 as β  approaches ∞.
Using more precise estimates due to Pomerance [ 361 ] of the number of
base-2 pseudoprimes of a given size, a randomly chosen 512-bit number
that is called prime by P SEUDOPRIME  has less than one chance in 1020 of
being a base-2 pseudoprime, and a randomly chosen 1024-bit number that
is called prime has less than one chance in 1041 of being a base-2
pseudoprime. Thus, if you are merely trying to find a lar ge prime for some
application, for all practical purposes you almost never go wrong by
choosing lar ge numbers at random until one of them causes P SEUDOPRIME  to
return PRIME . But when the numbers being tested for primality are not
randomly chosen, you might need a better approach for testing primality . As
we’ll see, a little more cleverness, and some randomization, will yield a
primality-testing method that works well on all inputs.
Since P SEUDOPRIME  checks equation (31.39) for only a  = 2, you might
think that you could eliminate all the errors by simply checking equation
(31.39) for a second base number , say a  = 3. Better yet, you could check
equation (31.39) for even more values of a . Unfortunately , even checking
for several values of a  does not eliminate all errors, because there exist
composite integers n , known as Carmichael numbers , that satisfy equation
(31.39) for all  
 . (The equation does fail when gcd( a , n ) > 1—that is,
when 
 —but demonstrating that n  is composite by finding such an a
can be dif ficult if n  has only lar ge prime factors.) The first three Carmichael
numbers are 561, 1 105, and 1729. Carmichael numbers are extremely rare.
For example, only 255 of them are less than 100,000,000. Exercise 31.8-2
helps explain why they are so rare.
Page number: 1106
Let’ s see how to improve the primality test so that Carmichael numbers
won’ t fool it.
The Miller -Rabin randomized primality test
The Miller -Rabin primality test overcomes the problems of the simple
procedure P SEUDOPRIME  with two modifications:
It tries several randomly chosen base values a  instead of just one base
value.
While computing each modular exponentiation, it looks for a
nontrivial square root of 1, modulo n , during the final set of
squarings. If it finds one, it stops and returns COMPOSITE . Corollary
31.35 from Section 31.6  justifies detecting composites in this manner .
The pseudocode for the Miller -Rabin primality test appears in the
procedures M ILLER -R ABIN  and W ITNESS . The input n  > 2 to M ILLER -R ABIN
is the odd number to be tested for primality , and s  is the number of
randomly chosen base values from 
  to be tried. The code uses the
random-number generator R ANDOM  described on page 129: R ANDOM (2, n  –
2) returns a randomly chosen integer a  satisfying 2 ≤ a  ≤ n  – 2. (This range
of values avoids having a  = ≥1 (mod n ).) The call of the auxiliary procedure
W ITNESS ( a , n ) returns TRUE  if and only if a  is a “witness” to the
compositeness of n —that is, if it is possible using a  to prove (in a manner
that we will see) that n  is composite. The test W ITNESS ( a , n ) is an extension
of, but more ef fective than, the test in equation (31.39) that formed the basis
for P SEUDOPRIME , using a  = 2.
Let’ s first understand how W ITNESS  works, and then we’ll see how the
Miller -Rabin primality test uses it. Let n  – 1 = 2tu  where t  ≥ 1 and u  is odd.
That is, the binary representation of n  – 1 is the binary representation of the
odd integer u  followed by exactly t  zeros. Therefore, 
 , so that
one way to compute an −1 mod n  is to first compute au mod n  and then
square the result t  times successively .
M ILLER -R ABIN ( n , s ) //  n  > 2 is odd
1 for  j  = 1 to  s
2 a  = R ANDOM (2, n  – 2)
3 if  W ITNESS ( a , n )
4 r eturn  COMPOSITE //  definitely
Page number: 1107
5 r eturn  PRIME //  almost surely
W ITNESS ( a , n )
1let t  and u  be such that t  ≥ 1, u  is odd, and n  – 1 = 2tu
2 x 0  = M ODULAR -E XPONENTIA TION ( a , u , n )
3 for  i  = 1 to  t
4
5 if  x i  == 1 and x i –1  ≠ 1 and x i –1  ≠ n  – 1
6 r eturn  TRUE //  found a nontrivial square root of 1
7 if  x t  ≠ 1
8 r eturn  TRUE //  composite, as in P SEUDOPRIME
9 r eturn  F ALSE
This pseudocode for W ITNESS  computes an –1 mod n  by first computing
the value x0  = au mod n  in line 2 and then repeatedly squaring the result t
times in the for  loop of lines 3–6. By induction on i , the sequence x0 , x1 , …,
xt  of values computed satisfies the equation 
  for i  = 0, 1, …, t , so
that in particular xt  = an –1 (mod n ). After line 4 performs a squaring step,
however , the loop will terminate early if lines 5–6 detect that a nontrivial
square root of 1 has just been discovered. (W e’ll explain these tests shortly .)
If so, the procedure stops and returns TRUE . Lines 7–8 return TRUE  if the
value computed for xt  = an –1 (mod n ) is not equal to 1, just as the
P SEUDOPRIME  procedure returns COMPOSITE  in this case. Line 9 returns F ALSE
if lines 6 or 8 have not returned TRUE .
The following lemma proves the correctness of W ITNESS .
Lemma 31.38
If W ITNESS ( a , n ) returns TRUE , then a proof that n  is composite can be
constructed using a  as a witness.
Proof    If W ITNESS  returns TRUE  from line 8, it’ s because line 7 determined
that xt  = an –1 mod n  ≠ 1. If n  is prime, however , Fermat’ s theorem (Theorem
31.31) says that an –1 = 1 (mod n ) for all 
 . Since 
  if n  is prime,
Fermat’ s theorem also says that an –1 = 1 (mod n ) for all 
 . Therefore, n
cannot be prime, and the equation an –1 mod n  ≠ 1 proves this fact.
If W ITNESS  returns TRUE  from line 6, then it has discovered that xi –1  is a
nontrivial square root of 1, modulo n , since we have that xi –1  ≠ ±1 (mod n )
yet 
 . Corollary 31.35 on page 934 states that only if n  is
Page number: 1108
composite can there exist a nontrivial square root of 1, modulo n , so that
demonstrating that xi –1  is a nontrivial square root of 1, modulo n  proves that
n  is composite.
▪
Thus, if the call W ITNESS ( a , n ) returns TRUE , then n  is surely composite,
and the witness a , along with the reason that the procedure returns TRUE
(did it return from line 6 or from line 8?), provides a proof that n  is
composite.
Let’ s explore an alternative view of the behavior of W ITNESS  as a
function of the sequence X  = 〈 x0 , x1 , …, xt〉 . W e’ll find this view useful later
on, when we analyze the error rate of the Miller -Rabin primality test. Note
that if xi  = 1 for some 0 ≤ i  < t , W ITNESS  might not compute the rest of the
sequence. If it were to do so, however , each value xi +1 , xi +2 , …, xt  would be
1, so we can consider these positions in the sequence X  as being all 1s.
There are four cases:
1 . X  = 〈 …, d〉 , where d  ≠ 1: the sequence X  does not end in 1. Return
TRUE  in line 8, since a  is a witness to the compositeness of n  (by
Fermat’ s Theorem).
2 . X  = 〈 1, 1, …, 1 〉 : the sequence X  is all 1s. Return F ALSE , since a  is
not a witness to the compositeness of n .
3 . X  = 〈 …, –1, 1, …, 1 〉 : the sequence X  ends in 1, and the last non-1 is
equal to –1. Return F ALSE , since a  is not a witness to the
compositeness of n .
4 . X  = 〈 …, d , 1, …, 1 〉 , where d  ≠ ±1: the sequence X  ends in 1, but the
last non-1 is not –1. Return TRUE  in line 6: a  is a witness to the
compositeness of n , since d  is a nontrivial square root of 1.
Now , let’ s examine the Miller -Rabin primality test based on how it uses
the W ITNESS  procedure. As before, assume that n  is an odd integer greater
than 2.
The procedure M ILLER -R ABIN  is a probabilistic search for a proof that n
is composite. The main loop (beginning on line 1) picks up to s  random
values of a  from 
 , except for 1 and n  – 1 (line 2). If it picks a value of a
that is a witness to the compositeness of n , then M ILLER -R ABIN  returns
Page number: 1109
COMPOSITE  on line 4. Such a result is always correct, by the correctness of
W ITNESS . If M ILLER -R ABIN  finds no witness in s  trials, then the procedure
assumes that it found no witness because no witnesses exist, and therefore it
assumes that n  is prime. W e’ll see that this result is likely to be correct if s
is lar ge enough, but there is still a tiny chance that the procedure could be
unlucky in its choice of s  random values of a , so that even though the
procedure failed to find a witness, at least one witness exists.
T o illustrate the operation of M ILLER -R ABIN , let n  be the Carmichael
number 561, so that n  – 1 = 560 = 24 · 35, t  = 4, and u  = 35. If the procedure
chooses a  = 7 as a base, the column for b  = 35 in Figure 31.4  ( Section 31.6 )
shows that W ITNESS  computes x0  = a35 = 241 (mod 561). Because of how
the M ODULAR -E XPONENTIA TION  procedure operates recursively on its
parameter b , the first four columns in Figure 31.4  represent the factor 24 of
560—the rightmost four zeros in the binary representation of 560—reading
these four zeros from right to left in the binary representation. Thus
W ITNESS  computes the sequence X  = 〈 241, 298, 166, 67, 1 〉 . Then, in the last
squaring step, W ITNESS  discovers that a280 is a nontrivial square root of 1
since a280 = 67 (mod n ) and ( a280)2 = a560 = 1 (mod n ). Therefore, a  = 7 is a
witness to the compositeness of n , W ITNESS (7, n ) returns TRUE , and M ILLER -
R ABIN  returns COMPOSITE .
If n  is a β -bit number , M ILLER -R ABIN  requires O ( sβ ) arithmetic
operations and O ( sβ3) bit operations, since it requires asymptotically no
more work than s  modular exponentiations.
Err or rate of the Miller -Rabin primality test
If M ILLER -R ABIN  returns PRIME , then there is a very slim chance that it has
made an error . Unlike P SEUDOPRIME , however , the chance of error does not
depend on n : there are no bad inputs for this procedure. Rather , it depends
on the size of s  and the “luck of the draw” in choosing base values a .
Moreover , since each test is more stringent than a simple check of equation
(31.39), we can expect on general principles that the error rate should be
small for randomly chosen integers n . The following theorem presents a
more precise ar gument.
Theorem 31.39
Page number: 1110
If n  is an odd composite number , then the number of witnesses to the
compositeness of n  is at least ( n  – 1)/2.
Proof    The proof shows that the number of nonwitnesses is at most ( n  –
1)/2, which implies the theorem.
W e start by claiming that any nonwitness must be a member of 
 .
Why? Consider any nonwitness a . It must satisfy an –1 = 1 (mod n ) or ,
equivalently , a  · an −2 = 1 (mod n ). Thus the equation ax  = 1 (mod n ) has a
solution, namely an −2. By Corollary 31.21 on page 924, gcd( a , n ) | 1, which
in turn implies that gcd( a , n ) = 1. Therefore, a  is a member of 
 , and all
nonwitnesses belong to 
 .
T o complete the proof, we show that not only are all nonwitnesses
contained in 
 , they are all contained in a proper subgroup B  of 
  (recall
that B  is a pr oper  subgroup of 
  when B  is subgroup of 
  but B  is not
equal to 
 ). By Corollary 31.16 on page 921, we then have 
 .
Since 
 , we obtain | B | ≤ ( n  – 1)/2. Therefore, if all nonwitnesses
are contained in a proper subgroup of 
 , then the number of nonwitnesses
is at most ( n  – 1)/2, so that the number of witnesses must be at least ( n  –
1)/2.
T o find a proper subgroup B  of 
  containing all of the nonwitnesses, we
consider two cases.
Case 1:  There exists an 
  such that
xn –1 ≠ 1 (mod n ).
In other words, n  is not a Carmichael number . Since, as noted earlier ,
Carmichael numbers are extremely rare, case 1 is the more typical case
(e.g., when n  has been chosen randomly and is being tested for primality).
Let 
 . The set B  must be nonempty , since 1 ∈  B . The
set B  is closed under multiplication modulo n , and so B  is a subgroup of 
by Theorem 31.14. Every nonwitness belongs to B , since a nonwitness a
satisfies an –1 = 1 (mod n ). Since 
 , we have that B  is a proper
subgroup of 
 .
Case 2:  For all 
 ,
In other words, n  is a Carmichael number . This case is extremely rare in
practice. Unlike a pseudoprimality test, however , the Miller -Rabin test can
Page number: 1111
ef ficiently determine that Carmichael numbers are composite, as we’re
about to see.
In this case, n  cannot be a prime power . T o see why , suppose to the
contrary that n  = pe, where p  is a prime and e  > 1. W e derive a contradiction
as follows. Since we assume that n  is odd, p  must also be odd. Theorem
31.32 on page 933 implies that 
  is a cyclic group: it contains a generator
g  such that 
 . (The formula
for ϕ ( n ) comes from equation (31.21) on page 920.) By equation (31.40),
we have gn –1 = 1 (mod n ). Then the discrete logarithm theorem (Theorem
31.33 on page 933, taking y  = 0) implies that n  – 1 = 0 (mod ϕ  ( n )), or
( p  – 1) pe −1 | pe – 1.
This statement is a contradiction for e  > 1, since ( p  – 1) pe −1 is divisible by
the prime p , but pe – 1 is not. Thus n  is not a prime power .
Since the odd composite number n  is not a prime power , we decompose
it into a product n1 n2 , where n1  and n2  are odd numbers greater than 1 that
are relatively prime to each other . (There may be several ways to
decompose n , and it does not matter which one we choose. For example, if 
, then we can choose 
  and 
 .)
Recall that t  and u  are such that n  – 1 = 2tu , where t  ≥ 1 and u  is odd, and
that for an input a , the procedure W ITNESS  computes the sequence
where all computations are performed modulo n .
Let us call a pair ( v , j ) of integers acceptable  if 
 , and
Acceptable pairs certainly exist, since u  is odd. Choose v  = n  – 1 and j  = 0,
and let u  = 2 k  + 1, so that 
 . T aking this number
modulo n  gives ( n  – 1)2 k +1 = ( n  – 1)2 k · ( n  – 1) = (–1)2 k · –1 = −1 (mod n ).
Thus, ( n  – 1, 0) is an acceptable pair . Now pick the lar gest possible j  such
that there exists an acceptable pair ( v , j ), and fix v  so that ( v , j ) is an
acceptable pair . Let

Page number: 1112
Since B  is closed under multiplication modulo n , it is a subgroup of 
 . By
Theorem 31.15 on page 921, therefore, | B | divides 
 . Every nonwitness
must be a member of B , since the sequence X  produced by a nonwitness
must either be all 1s or else contain a –1 no later than the j th position, by
the maximality of j . (If ( a , j ′) is acceptable, where a  is a nonwitness, we
must have j ′ ≤ j  by how we chose j .)
W e now use the existence of v  to demonstrate that there exists a 
, and hence that B  is a proper subgroup of 
 . Since 
, we also have 
  by Corollary 31.29 to the
Chinese remainder theorem. By Corollary 31.28, there exists a w
simultaneously satisfying the equations
w = v  (mod n 1 ),
w = 1 (mod n 2 ).
Therefore,
Corollary 31.29 gives that 
  implies 
  and also that 
implies 
 . Hence, we conclude that 
 , and
so w  ∉  B .
It remains to show that 
 . W e start by working separately modulo
n1  and modulo n2 . W orking modulo n1 , since 
 , we have that gcd( v ,
n ) = 1. Also, we have gcd( v , n1 ) = 1, since if v  does not have any common
divisors with n , then it certainly does not have any common divisors with
n1 . Since w  = v  (mod n1 ), we see that gcd( w , n1 ) = 1. W orking modulo n2 ,
we have w  = 1 (mod n2 ) implies gcd( w , n2 ) = 1 by Exercise 31.2-3. Since
gcd( w , n1 ) = 1 and gcd( w , n2 ) = 1, Theorem 31.6 on page 908 yields gcd( w ,
n1 n2 ) = gcd( w , n ) = 1. That is, 
 .
Therefore, we have 
 , and we can conclude in case 2 that B ,
which includes all nonwitnesses, is a proper subgroup of 
  and therefore
has size at most ( n  – 1)/2.
In either case, the number of witnesses to the compositeness of n  is at
least ( n  – 1)/2.
▪
Page number: 1113
Theorem 31.40
For any odd integer n  > 2 and positive integer s , the probability that
M ILLER -R ABIN ( n , s ) errs is at most 2– s.
Proof    By Theorem 31.39, if n  is composite, then each execution of the for
loop of lines 1–4 of M ILLER -R ABIN  has a probability of at least 1/2 of
discovering a witness to the compositeness of n . M ILLER -R ABIN  makes an
error only if it is so unlucky as to miss discovering a witness to the
compositeness of n  on each of the s  iterations of the main loop. The
probability of such a sequence of misses is at most 2– s.
▪
If n  is prime, M ILLER -R ABIN  always reports P RIME , and if n  is composite,
the chance that M ILLER -R ABIN  reports P RIME  is at most 2− s.
When applying M ILLER -R ABIN  to a lar ge randomly chosen integer n ,
however , we need to consider as well the prior probability that n  is prime, in
order to correctly interpret M ILLER -R ABIN ’ s result. Suppose that we fix a bit
length β  and choose at random an integer n  of length β  bits to be tested for
primality , so that β  ≈ 1g n  ≈ 1.443 ln n . Let A  denote the event that n  is
prime. By the prime number theorem (Theorem 31.37), the probability that
n  is prime is approximately
Pr { A } ≈ 1/ln n
≈ 1.443/ β .
Now let B  denote the event that M ILLER -R ABIN  returns P RIME . W e have that 
 (or equivalently , that Pr{ B  | A } = 1) and 
  (or
equivalently , that 
 ).
But what is Pr{ A  | B }, the probability that n  is prime, given that M ILLER -
R ABIN  has returned P RIME ? By the alternate form of Bayes’ s theorem
(equation (C.20) on page 1 189) and approximating 
 , we have

Page number: 1114
This probability does not exceed 1/2 until s  exceeds 1g(ln n  – 1). Intuitively ,
that many initial trials are needed just for the confidence derived from
failing to find a witness to the compositeness of n  to overcome the prior
bias in favor of n  being composite. For a number with β  = 1024 bits, this
initial testing requires about
lg(ln n  – 1) ≈ lg( β /1.443)
≈ 9
trials. In any case, choosing s  = 50 should suf fice for almost any imaginable
application.
In fact, the situation is much better . If you are trying to find lar ge primes
by applying M ILLER -R ABIN  to lar ge randomly chosen odd integers, then
choosing a small value of s  (say 3) is unlikely to lead to erroneous results,
though we won’ t prove it here. The reason is that for a randomly chosen
odd composite integer n , the expected number of nonwitnesses to the
compositeness of n  is likely to be considerably smaller than ( n  – 1)/2.
If the integer n  is not chosen randomly , however , the best that can be
proven is that the number of nonwitnesses is at most ( n  – 1)/4, using an
improved version of Theorem 31.39. Furthermore, there do exist integers n
for which the number of nonwitnesses is ( n  – 1)/4.
Exer cises
31.8-1
Prove that if an odd integer n  > 1 is not a prime or a prime power , then there
exists a nontrivial square root of 1, modulo n .
★  31.8-2
It is possible to strengthen Euler ’ s theorem (Theorem 31.30) slightly to the
form
where 
  and λ( n ) is defined by
Prove that λ ( n ) | ϕ ( n ). A composite number n  is a Carmichael number if
λ ( n ) | n  – 1. The smallest Carmichael number is 561 = 3 · 1 1 · 17, for which
λ ( n ) = 1cm(2, 10, 16) = 80, which divides 560. Prove that Carmichael
Page number: 1115
numbers must be both “square-free” (not divisible by the square of any
prime) and the product of at least three primes. (For this reason, they are not
common.)
31.8-3
Prove that if x  is a nontrivial square root of 1, modulo n , then gcd( x  − 1, n )
and gcd( x  + 1, n ) are both nontrivial divisors of n .
Pr oblems
31-1     Binary gcd algorithm
Most computers can perform the operations of subtraction, testing the parity
(odd or even) of a binary integer , and halving more quickly than computing
remainders. This problem investigates the binary gcd algorithm , which
avoids the remainder computations used in Euclid’ s algorithm.
a.  Prove that if a  and b  are both even, then gcd( a , b ) = 2 · gcd( a /2, b /2).
b.  Prove that if a  is odd and b  is even, then gcd( a , b ) = gcd( a , b /2).
c.  Prove that if a  and b  are both odd, then gcd( a , b ) = gcd(( a  – b )/2, b ).
d.  Design an ef ficient binary gcd algorithm for input integers a  and b , where
a  ≥ b , that runs in O (1g a ) time. Assume that each subtraction, parity test,
and halving takes unit time.
31-2     Analysis of bit operations in Euclid’ s algorithm
a.  Consider the ordinary “paper and pencil” algorithm for long division:
dividing a  by b , which yields a quotient q  and remainder r . Show that this
method requires O ((1 + 1g q )1g b ) bit operations.
b.  Define μ ( a , b ) = (1 + 1g a )(1 + 1g b ). Show that the number of bit
operations performed by E UCLID  in reducing the problem of computing
gcd( a , b ) to that of computing gcd( b , a  mod b ) is at most c ( μ ( a , b ) – μ ( b ,
a  mod b )) for some suf ficiently lar ge constant c  > 0.
c.  Show that E UCLID ( a , b ) requires O ( μ ( a , b )) bit operations in general and
O ( β2) bit operations when applied to two β -bit inputs.
31-3     Three algorithms for Fibonacci numbers
Page number: 1116
This problem compares the ef ficiency of three methods for computing the
n th Fibonacci number Fn , given n . Assume that the cost of adding,
subtracting, or multiplying two numbers is O (1), independent of the size of
the numbers.
a.  Show that the running time of the straightforward recursive method for
computing Fn  based on recurrence (3.31) on page 69 is exponential in n .
(See, for example, the F IB  procedure on page 751.)
b.  Show how to compute Fn  in O ( n ) time using memoization.
c.  Show how to compute Fn  in O (1g n ) time using only integer addition and
multiplication. ( Hint:  Consider the matrix 
  and its powers.)
d.  Assume now that adding two β -bit numbers takes Θ( β ) time and that
multiplying two β -bit numbers takes Θ( β2) time. What is the running time
of these three methods under this more reasonable cost measure for the
elementary arithmetic operations?
31-4     Quadratic residues
Let p  be an odd prime. A number 
  is a quadratic residue  modulo p , if
the equation x2 = a  (mod p ) has a solution for the unknown x .
a.  Show that there are exactly ( p  – 1)/2 quadratic residues, modulo p .
b.  If p  is prime, we define the Legendre symbol  
 , for 
 , to be 1 if a  is
a quadratic residue, modulo p , and –1 otherwise. Prove that if 
 , then
Give an ef ficient algorithm that determines whether a given number a  is a
quadratic residue, modulo p . Analyze the ef ficiency of your algorithm.
c.  Prove that if p  is a prime of the form 4 k  + 3 and a  is a quadratic residue in
, then ak +1 mod p  is a square root of a , modulo p . How much time is
required to find the square root of a quadratic residue a , modulo p ?
d.  Describe an ef ficient randomized algorithm for finding a nonquadratic
residue, modulo an arbitrary prime p , that is, a member of 
  that is not a
Page number: 1117
quadratic residue. How many arithmetic operations does your algorithm
require on average?
Chapter notes
Knuth [ 260 ] contains a good discussion of algorithms for finding the
greatest common divisor , as well as other basic number -theoretic
algorithms. Dixon [ 121 ] gives an overview of factorization and primality
testing. Bach [ 33 ], Riesel [ 378 ], and Bach and Shallit [ 34 ] provide
overviews of the basics of computational number theory; Shoup [ 41 1 ]
provides a more recent survey . The conference proceedings edited by
Pomerance [ 362 ] contains several excellent survey articles.
Knuth [ 260 ] discusses the origin of Euclid’ s algorithm. It appears in
Book 7, Propositions 1 and 2, of the Greek mathematician Euclid’ s
Elements , which was written around 300 B . C . E . Euclid’ s description may
have been derived from an algorithm due to Eudoxus around 375 B . C . E .
Euclid’ s algorithm may hold the honor of being the oldest nontrivial
algorithm, rivaled only by an algorithm for multiplication known to the
ancient Egyptians. Shallit [ 407 ] chronicles the history of the analysis of
Euclid’ s algorithm.
Knuth attributes a special case of the Chinese remainder theorem
(Theorem 31.27) to the Chinese mathematician Sun-T s ŭ , who lived
sometime between 200 B . C . E . and 200 C . E .—the date is quite uncertain. The
same special case was given by the Greek mathematician Nichomachus
around 100 C . E . It was generalized by Qin Jiushao in 1247. The Chinese
remainder theorem was finally stated and proved in its full generality by L.
Euler in 1734.
The randomized primality-testing algorithm presented here is due to
Miller [ 327 ] and Rabin [ 373 ] and is the fastest randomized primality-testing
algorithm known, to within constant factors. The proof of Theorem 31.40 is
a slight adaptation of one suggested by Bach [ 32 ]. A proof of a stronger
result for M ILLER -R ABIN  was given by Monier [ 332 , 333 ]. For many years
primality-testing was the classic example of a problem where
randomization appeared to be necessary to obtain an ef ficient (polynomial-
time) algorithm. In 2002, however , Agrawal, Kayal, and Saxena [ 4 ]
surprised everyone with their deterministic polynomial-time primality-
testing algorithm. Until then, the fastest deterministic primality testing
Page number: 1118
algorithm known, due to Cohen and Lenstra [ 97 ], ran in (1g n )O (1g1g1g n )
time on input n , which is just slightly superpolynomial. Nonetheless, for
practical purposes, randomized primality-testing algorithms remain more
ef ficient and are generally preferred.
Beauchemin, Brassard, Crépeau, Goutier , and Pomerance [ 40 ] nicely
discuss the problem of finding lar ge “random” primes.
The concept of a public-key cryptosystem is due to Dif fie and Hellman
[ 1 15 ]. The RSA cryptosystem was proposed in 1977 by Rivest, Shamir , and
Adleman [ 380 ]. Since then, the field of cryptography has blossomed. Our
understanding of the RSA cryptosystem has deepened, and modern
implementations use significant refinements of the basic techniques
presented here. In addition, many new techniques have been developed for
proving cryptosystems to be secure. For example, Goldwasser and Micali
[ 190 ] show that randomization can be an ef fective tool in the design of
secure public-key encryption schemes. For signature schemes, Goldwasser ,
Micali, and Rivest [ 191 ] present a digital-signature scheme for which every
conceivable type of for gery is provably as dif ficult as factoring. Katz and
Lindell [ 253 ] provide an overview of modern cryptography .
The best algorithms for factoring lar ge numbers have a running time that
grows roughly exponentially with the cube root of the length of the number
n  to be factored. The general number -field sieve factoring algorithm (as
developed by Buhler , Lenstra, and Pomerance [ 77 ] as an extension of the
ideas in the number -field sieve factoring algorithm by Pollard [ 360 ] and
Lenstra et al. [ 295 ] and refined by Coppersmith [ 102 ] and others) is perhaps
the most ef ficient such algorithm in general for lar ge inputs. Although it is
dif ficult to give a rigorous analysis of this algorithm, under reasonable
assumptions we can derive a running-time estimate of L (1/3, n )1.902+ o (1),
where 
 .
The elliptic-curve method due to Lenstra [ 296 ] may be more ef fective
for some inputs than the number -field sieve method, since it can find a
small prime factor p  quite quickly . W ith this method, the time to find p  is
estimated to be 
 .
Page number: 1119
32        String Matching
T ext-editing programs frequently need to find all occurrences of a pattern in
the text. T ypically , the text is a document being edited, and the pattern
searched for is a particular word supplied by the user . Ef ficient algorithms
for this problem—called “string matching”—can greatly aid the
responsiveness of the text-editing program. Among their many other
applications, string-matching algorithms search for particular patterns in
DNA sequences. Internet search engines also use them to find web pages
relevant to queries.
The string-matching problem can be stated formally as follows. The text
is given as an array T [1 : n ] of length n , and the pattern is an array P [1 : m ]
of length m  ≤ n . The elements of P  and T  are characters drawn from an
alphabet ∑, which is a finite set of characters. For example, ∑ could be the
set {0 , 1 }, or it could be the set { a , b , …, z }. The character arrays P  and T
are often called strings  of characters.
As Figure 32.1  shows, pattern P  occurs with shift s  in text T  (or ,
equivalently , that pattern P  occurs beginning at position s  + 1  in text T ) if 0
≤ s  ≤ n  – m  and T [ s  + 1: s  + m ] = P [1: m ], that is, if T [ s  + j ] = P [ j ], for 1 ≤ j  ≤
m . If P  occurs with shift s  in T , then s  is a valid shift , and otherwise, s  is an
invalid shift . The string-matching problem  is the problem of finding all
valid shifts with which a given pattern P  occurs in a given text T .
Page number: 1120
Figur e 32.1  An example of the string-matching problem to find all occurrences of the pattern P  =
abaa  in the text T  = abcabaabcabac . The pattern occurs only once in the text, at shift s  = 3,
which is a valid shift. A vertical line connects each character of the pattern to its matching character
in the text, and all matched characters are shaded blue.
Except for the naive brute-force algorithm in Section 32.1 , each string-
matching algorithm in this chapter performs some preprocessing based on
the pattern and then finds all valid shifts. W e call this latter phase
“matching.” Here are the preprocessing and matching times for each of the
string-matching algorithms in this chapter . The total running time of each
algorithm is the sum of the preprocessing and matching times:
Algorithm Preprocessing time Matching time
Naive 0 O (( n  – m  + 1) m )
Rabin-Karp Θ( m ) O (( n  – m  + 1) m )
Finite automaton O ( m  |∑|) Θ( n )
Knuth-Morris-Pratt Θ( m ) Θ( n )
Suf fix array1 O ( n  1g n ) O ( m  1g n  + km )
Section 32.2  presents an interesting string-matching algorithm, due to Rabin
and Karp. Although the Θ(( n  – m  + 1) m ) worst-case running time of this
algorithm is no better than that of the naive method, it works much better on
average and in practice. It also generalizes nicely to other pattern-matching
problems. Section 32.3  then describes a string-matching algorithm that
begins by constructing a finite automaton specifically designed to search for
occurrences of the given pattern P  in a text. This algorithm takes O ( m  |∑|)
preprocessing time, but only Θ( n ) matching time. Section 32.4  presents the
similar , but much cleverer , Knuth-Morris-Pratt (or KMP) algorithm, which
has the same Θ( n ) matching time, but it reduces the preprocessing time to
only Θ( m ).
A completely dif ferent approach appears in Section 32.5 , which
examines suf fix arrays and the longest common prefix array . Y ou can use
these arrays not only to find a pattern in a text, but also to answer other
questions, such as what is the longest repeated substring in the text and
what is the longest common substring between two texts. The algorithm to
form the suf fix array in Section 32.5  takes O ( n  1g n ) time and, given the
Page number: 1121
suf fix array , the section shows how to compute the longest common prefix
array in O ( n ) time.
Notation and terminology
W e denote by ∑* (read “sigma-star”) the set of all finite-length strings
formed using characters from the alphabet ∑. This chapter considers only
finite-length strings. The 0-length empty string , denoted ϵ , also belongs to
∑*. The length of a string x  is denoted | x |. The concatenation  of two strings
x  and y , denoted xy , has length | x | + | y | and consists of the characters from x
followed by the characters from y .
Figur e 32.2  A graphical proof of Lemma 32.1. Suppose that x  ⊐  z  and y  ⊐  z . The three parts of the
figure illustrate the three cases of the lemma. V ertical lines connect matching regions (shown in blue)
of the strings. (a)  If | x | ≤ | y |, then x  ⊐  y . (b)  If | x | ≥ | y |, then y  ⊐  x . (c)  If | x | = | y |, then x  = y .
A string w  is a prefix  of a string x , denoted w  ⊏  x , if x  = wy  for some
string y  ∈  ∑*. Note that if w  ⊏  x , then | w | ≤ | x |. Similarly , a string w  is a
suf fix  of a string x , denoted w  ⊐  x , if x  = yw  for some y  ∈  ∑*. As with a
prefix, w  ⊐  x  implies | w | ≤ | x |. For example, ab  ⊏  abcca  and cca  ⊐
abcca . A string w  is a proper prefix  of x  if w  ⊏  x  and | w | < | x |, and
likewise for a proper suf fix . The empty string ϵ  is both a suf fix and a prefix
of every string. For any strings x  and y  and any character a , we have x  ⊐  y
if and only if xa  ⊐  ya . The ⊏  and ⊐  relations are transitive. The following
lemma will be useful later .
Lemma 32.1 (Overlapping-suf fix lemma)
Page number: 1122
Suppose that x , y , and z  are strings such that x  ⊐  z  and y  ⊐  z . If | x | ≤ | y |, then
x  ⊐  y . If | x | ≥ | y |, then y  ⊐  x . If | x | = | y |, then x  = y .
Proof    See Figure 32.2  for a graphical proof.
▪
For convenience, denote the k -character prefix P [1: k ] of the pattern
P [1: m ] by P [: k ]. Thus, we can write P [:0] = ϵ  and P [: m ] = P  = P [1: m ].
Similarly , denote the k -character prefix of the text T  by T [: k ]. Using this
notation, we can state the string-matching problem as that of finding all
shifts s  in the range 0 ≤ s  ≤ n  – m  such that P  ⊐  T [: s  + m ].
Our pseudocode allows two equal-length strings to be compared for
equality as a primitive operation. If the strings are compared from left to
right and the comparison stops when a mismatch is discovered, we assume
that the time taken by such a test is a linear function of the number of
matching characters discovered. T o be precise, the test “ x  == y ” is assumed
to take Θ( t ) time, where t  is the length of the longest string z  such that z  ⊏  x
and z  ⊏  y .
32.1    The naive string-matching algorithm
The N AIVE -S TRING -M A TCHER  procedure finds all valid shifts using a loop
that checks the condition P [1: m ] = T [ s +1: s + m ] for each of the n − m +1
possible values of s .
N AIVE -S TRING -M A TCHER ( T , P , n , m )
1 for  s  = 0 to  n  – m
2 if  P [1: m ] == T [ s  + 1: s  + m ]
3 print “Pattern occurs with shift” s
Figure 32.3  portrays the naive string-matching procedure as sliding a
“template” containing the pattern over the text, noting for which shifts all of
the characters on the template equal the corresponding characters in the
text. The for  loop of lines 1–3 considers each possible shift explicitly . The
test in line 2 determines whether the current shift is valid. This test
implicitly loops to check corresponding character positions until all
Page number: 1123
positions match successfully or a mismatch is found. Line 3 prints out each
valid shift s .
Procedure N AIVE -S TRING -M A TCHER  takes O (( n  – m  + 1) m ) time, and this
bound is tight in the worst case. For example, consider the text string an (a
string of na ’ s) and the pattern am. For each of the n − m +1 possible values of
the shift s , the implicit loop on line 2 to compare corresponding characters
must execute m  times to validate the shift. The worst-case running time is
thus Θ(( n  − m  + 1) m ), which is Θ( n2) if m  = ⌊ n /2 ⌋ . Because it requires no
preprocessing, N AIVE -S TRING -M A TCHER ’ s running time equals its matching
time.
N AIVE -S TRING -M A TCHER  is far from an optimal procedure for this
problem. Indeed, this chapter will show that the Knuth-Morris-Pratt
algorithm is much better in the worst case. The naive string-matcher is
inef ficient because it entirely ignores information gained about the text for
one value of s  when it considers other values of s . Such information can be
quite valuable, however . For example, if P  = aaab  and s  = 0 is valid, then
none of the shifts 1, 2, or 3 are valid, since T [4] = b . The following sections
examine several ways to make ef fective use of this sort of information.
Figur e 32.3  The operation of the N AIVE -S TRING -M A TCHER  procedure for the pattern P  = aab
and the text T  = acaabc . Imagine the pattern P  as a template that slides next to the text. (a)–(d)  The
four successive alignments tried by the naive string matcher . In each part, vertical lines connect
corresponding regions found to match (shown in blue), and a red jagged line connects the first
mismatched character found, if any . The algorithm finds one occurrence of the pattern, at shift s  = 2,
shown in part (c).
Exer cises
32.1-1
Show the comparisons the naive string matcher makes for the pattern P  =
0001  in the text T  = 000010001010001 .
32.1-2
Page number: 1124
Suppose that all characters in the pattern P  are dif ferent. Show how to
accelerate N AIVE -S TRING -M A TCHER  to run in O ( n ) time on an n -character
text T .
32.1-3
Suppose that pattern P  and text T  are randomly  chosen strings of length m
and n , respectively , from the d -ary alphabet ∑d  = {0, 1, …, d  – 1}, where d
≥ 2. Show that the expected  number of character -to-character comparisons
made by the implicit loop in line 2 of the naive algorithm is
over all executions of this loop. (Assume that the naive algorithm stops
comparing characters for a given shift once it finds a mismatch or matches
the entire pattern.) Thus, for randomly chosen strings, the naive algorithm is
quite ef ficient.
32.1-4
Suppose that the pattern P  may contain occurrences of a gap character  ♢
that can match an arbitrary  string of characters (even one of 0 length). For
example, the pattern ab ♢ba ♢c  occurs in the text cabccbacbacab  as
and as
The gap character may occur an arbitrary number of times in the pattern but
not at all in the text. Give a polynomial-time algorithm to determine
whether such a pattern P  occurs in a given text T , and analyze the running
time of your algorithm.
32.2    The Rabin-Karp algorithm
Rabin and Karp proposed a string-matching algorithm that performs well in
practice and that also generalizes to other algorithms for related problems,
such as two-dimensional pattern matching. The Rabin-Karp algorithm uses
Page number: 1125
Θ( m ) preprocessing time, and its worst-case running time is Θ(( n − m +1) m ).
Based on certain assumptions, however , its average-case running time is
better .
This algorithm makes use of elementary number -theoretic notions such
as the equivalence of two numbers modulo a third number . Y ou might want
to refer to Section 31.1  for the relevant definitions.
For expository purposes, let’ s assume that ∑ = { 0 , 1 , 2 , …, 9 }, so that
each character is a decimal digit. (In the general case, you can assume that
each character is a digit in radix- d  notation, so that it has a numerical value
in the range 0 to d  – 1, where d  = |∑|.) Y ou can then view a string of k
consecutive characters as representing a length- k  decimal number . For
example, the character string 31415  corresponds to the decimal number
31,415. Because we interpret the input characters as both graphical symbols
and digits, it will be convenient in this section to denote them as digits in
standard text font.
Given a pattern P [1: m ], let p  denote its corresponding decimal value. In
a similar manner , given a text T [1: n ], let ts  denote the decimal value of the
length- m  substring T [ s  + 1: s  + m ], for s  = 0, 1, …, n  – m . Certainly , ts  = p  if
and only if T  [ s  + 1: s  + m ] = P [1: m ], and thus, s  is a valid shift if and only if
ts  = p . If you could compute p  in Θ( m ) time and all the ts  values in a total of
Θ( n  – m  + 1) time,2 then you could determine all valid shifts s  in Θ( m )+Θ( n
− m  + 1) = Θ( n ) time by comparing p  with each of the ts  values. (For the
moment, let’ s not worry about the possibility that p  and the ts  values might
be very lar ge numbers.)
Indeed, you can compute p  in Θ( m ) time using Horner ’ s rule (see
Problem 2-3):
Similarly , you can compute t0  from T [1: m ] in Θ( m ) time.
T o compute the remaining values t1 , t2 , …, tn – m  in Θ( n  – m ) time,
observe that you can compute ts +1  from ts  in constant time, since
Subtracting 10m −1T  [ s  + 1] removes the high-order digit from ts , multiplying
the result by 10 shifts the number left by one digit position, and adding T [ s
Page number: 1126
+ m  + 1] brings in the appropriate low-order digit. For example, suppose
that m  = 5, ts  = 31415, and the new low-order digit is T [ s  + 5 + 1] = 2. The
high-order digit to remove is T [ s  + 1] = 3, and so
t s +1 = 10 (31415 − 10000 · 3) + 2
= 14152.
If you precompute the constant 10m −1 (which you can do in O (1g m ) time
using the techniques of Section 31.6 , although for this application a
straightforward O ( m )-time method suf fices), then each execution of
equation (32.1) takes a constant number of arithmetic operations. Thus, you
can compute p  in Θ( m ) time, and you can compute all of t0 , t1 , …, tn − m  in
Θ( n  − m  + 1) time. Therefore, you can find all occurrences of the pattern
P [1: m ] in the text T [1: n ] with Θ( m ) preprocessing time and Θ( n  − m  + 1)
matching time.
This scheme works well if P  is short enough and the alphabet ∑ is small
enough that arithmetic operations on p  and ts  take constant time. But what if
P  is long, or if the size of ∑ means that instead of powers of 10 in equation
(32.1) you have to use powers of a lar ger number (such as powers of 256
for the extended ASCII character set)? Then the values of p  and ts  might be
too lar ge to work with in constant time. Fortunately , this problem can be
solved, as Figure 32.4  shows: compute p  and the ts  values modulo a suitable
modulus q . Y ou can compute p  modulo q  in Θ( m ) time and all the ts  values
modulo q  in Θ( n  − m  + 1) time. W ith |∑| = 10, if you choose the modulus q
as a prime such that 10 q  just fits within one computer word, then you can
perform all the necessary computations with single-precision arithmetic. In
general, with a d -ary alphabet {0, 1, …, d  – 1}, choose q  so that dq  fits
within a computer word and adjust the recurrence equation (32.1) to work
modulo q , so that it becomes

Page number: 1127
Figur e 32.4  The Rabin-Karp algorithm. Each character is a decimal digit. V alues are computed
modulo 13. (a)  A text string. A window of length 5 is shaded blue. The numerical value of the blue
number , computed modulo 13, yields the value 7. (b)  The same text string with values computed
modulo 13 for each possible position of a length-5 window . Assuming the pattern P  = 31415, look
for windows whose value modulo 13 is 7, since 31415 = 7 (mod 13). The algorithm finds two such
windows, shaded blue in the figure. The first, beginning at text position 7, is indeed an occurrence of
the pattern. The second window , beginning at text position 13, is a spurious hit. (c)  How to compute
the value for a window in constant time, given the value for the previous window . The first window
has value 31415. Dropping the high-order digit 3, shifting left (multiplying by 10), and then adding
in the low-order digit 2 gives the new value 14152. Because all computations are performed modulo
13, the value for the first window is 7, and the value for the new window is 8.
where h  = dm −1 mod q  is the value of the digit “1” in the high-order position
of an m -digit text window .
Page number: 1128
The solution of working modulo q  is not perfect, however: ts  = p  (mod
q ) does not automatically mean that ts  = p . On the other hand, if ts  ≠ p  (mod
q ), then you definitely know that ts  ≠ p , so that shift s  is invalid. Thus you
can use the test ts  = p  (mod q ) as a fast heuristic test to rule out invalid
shifts. If ts  = p  (mod q )—a hit —then you need to test further to see whether
s  is really valid or you just have a spurious hit . This additional test
explicitly checks the condition P [1: m ] = T [ s  + 1: s  + m ]. If q  is lar ge enough,
then you would hope that spurious hits occur infrequently enough that the
cost of the extra checking is low .
The procedure R ABIN -K ARP -M A TCHER  on the next page makes these
ideas precise. The inputs to the procedure are the text T , the pattern P , their
lengths n  and m , the radix d  to use (which is typically taken to be |∑|), and
the prime q  to use. The procedure works as follows. All characters are
interpreted as radix- d  digits. The subscripts on t  are provided only for
clarity: the procedure works correctly if all the subscripts are dropped. Line
1 initializes h  to the value of the high-order digit position of an m -digit
window . Lines 2–6 compute p  as the value of P [1: m ] mod q  and t0  as the
value of T [1: m ] mod q . The for  loop of lines 7–12 iterates through all
possible shifts s , maintaining the following invariant:
Whenever line 8 is executed, ts  = T [ s  + 1: s  + m ] mod q .
If a hit occurs because p  = ts  in line 8, then line 9 determines whether s  is a
valid shift or the hit was spurious via the test P [1: m ] == T [ s  +1: s  + m ]. Line
10 prints out any valid shifts that are found. If s  < n  – m  (checked in line
1 1), then the for  loop will iterate at least one more time, and so line 12 first
executes to ensure that the loop invariant holds upon the next iteration. Line
12 computes the value of ts +1  mod q  from the value of ts  mod q  in constant
time using equation (32.2) directly .
R ABIN -K ARP -M A TCHER  takes Θ( m ) preprocessing time, and its matching
time is Θ(( n  − m  + 1) m ) in the worst case, since (like the naive string-
matching algorithm) the Rabin-Karp algorithm explicitly verifies every
valid shift. If P  = am and T  = an, then verifying takes Θ(( n − m +1) m ) time,
since each of the n − m +1 possible shifts is valid.
In many applications, you expect few valid shifts—perhaps some
constant c  of them. In such applications, the expected matching time of the
algorithm is only O (( n − m +1)+ cm ) = O ( n + m ), plus the time required to
Page number: 1129
process spurious hits. W e can base a heuristic analysis on the assumption
that reducing values modulo q  acts like a random mapping from ∑* to ℤq .
The expected number of spurious hits is then O ( n / q ), because we can
estimate the chance that an arbitrary ts  will be equivalent to p , modulo q , as
1/ q . Since there are O ( n ) positions at which the test of line 8 fails (actually ,
at most n  − m  + 1 positions) and checking each hit takes O ( m ) time in line
9, the expected matching time taken by the Rabin-Karp algorithm is
R ABIN -K ARP -M A TCHER ( T , P , n , m , d , q )
  1h  = dm −1 mod q
  2 p  = 0
  3 t 0  = 0
  4 for  i  = 1 to  m //  preprocessing
  5 p  = ( dp  + P [ i ]) mod q
  6 t 0  = ( dt 0  + T [ i ]) mod q
  7 for  s  = 0 to  n  – m //  matching—try all possible shifts
  8 if  p  == t s //  a hit?
  9 if  P [1: m ] == T [ s  + 1: s  + m ] //  valid shift?
10 print “Pattern occurs with shift” s
1 1 if  s  < n  – m
12
O ( n ) + O ( m ( v  + n / q )),
where v  is the number of valid shifts. This running time is O ( n ) if v  = O (1)
and you choose q  ≥ m . That is, if the expected number of valid shifts is
small ( O (1)) and you choose the prime q  to be lar ger than the length of the
pattern, then you can expect the Rabin-Karp procedure to use only O ( n  + m )
matching time. Since m  ≤ n , this expected matching time is O ( n ).
Exer cises
32.2-1
W orking modulo q  = 1 1, how many spurious hits does the Rabin-Karp
matcher encounter in the text T  = 3141592653589793 when looking for the
pattern P  = 26?
32.2-2
Describe how to extend the Rabin-Karp method to the problem of searching
a text string for an occurrence of any one of a given set of k  patterns. Start
Page number: 1130
by assuming that all k  patterns have the same length. Then generalize your
solution to allow the patterns to have dif ferent lengths.
32.2-3
Show how to extend the Rabin-Karp method to handle the problem of
looking for a given m  × m  pattern in an n  × n  array of characters. (The
pattern may be shifted vertically and horizontally , but it may not be
rotated.)
32.2-4
Alice has a copy of a long n -bit file A  = 〈 an –1 , an –2 , …, a0〉 , and Bob
similarly has an n -bit file B  = 〈 bn –1 , bn –2 , …, b0〉 . Alice and Bob wish to
know if their files are identical. T o avoid transmitting all of A  or B , they use
the following fast probabilistic check. T ogether , they select a prime q  >
1000 n  and randomly select an integer x  from {0, 1, …, q  – 1}. Letting
Alice evaluates A ( x ) and Bob evaluates B ( x ). Prove that if A  ≠ B , there is at
most one chance in 1000 that A ( x ) = B ( x ), whereas if the two files are the
same, A ( x ) is necessarily the same as B ( x ). ( Hint:  See Exercise 31.4-4.)
32.3    String matching with finite automata
Many string-matching algorithms build a finite automaton—a simple
machine for processing information—that scans the text string T  for all
occurrences of the pattern P . This section presents a method for building
such an automaton. These string-matching automata are ef ficient: they
examine each text character exactly once , taking constant time per text
character . The matching time used—after preprocessing the pattern to build
the automaton—is therefore Θ( n ). The time to build the automaton,
however , can be lar ge if ∑ is lar ge. Section 32.4  describes a clever way
around this problem.
W e begin this section with the definition of a finite automaton. W e then
examine a special string-matching automaton and show how to use it to find
occurrences of a pattern in a text. Finally , we’ll see how to construct the
string-matching automaton for a given input pattern.
Page number: 1131
Finite automata
A finite automaton  M , illustrated in Figure 32.5 , is a 5-tuple ( Q , q0 , A , ∑,
δ ), where
Q  is a finite set of states ,
q0  ∈  Q  is the start state ,
A  ⊆  Q  is a distinguished set of accepting states ,
∑ is a finite input alphabet ,
δ  is a function from Q  × ∑ into Q , called the transition function  of
M .
Figur e 32.5  A simple two-state finite automaton with state set Q  = {0, 1}, start state q 0  = 0, and
input alphabet ∑ = { a , b }. (a)  A tabular representation of the transition function δ . (b)  An equivalent
state-transition diagram. State 1, in orange, is the only accepting state. Directed edges represent
transitions. For example, the edge from state 1 to state 0 labeled b indicates that δ (1, b ) = 0. This
automaton accepts those strings that end in an odd number of a’ s. More precisely , it accepts a string x
if and only if x  = yz , where y  = ϵ  or y  ends with a b, and z  = ak, where k  is odd. For example, on
input abaaa , including the start state, this automaton enters the sequence of states 〈 0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1 〉 ,
and so it accepts this input. For input abbaa , it enters the sequence of states 〈 0, 1, 0, 0, 1, 0 〉 , and so
it rejects this input.
The finite automaton begins in state q0  and reads the characters of its
input string one at a time. If the automaton is in state q  and reads input
character a , it moves (“makes a transition”) from state q  to state δ ( q , a ).
Whenever its current state q  is a member of A , the machine M  has accepted
the string read so far . An input that is not accepted is rejected .
A finite automaton M  induces a function ϕ , called the final-state
function , from ∑* to Q  such that ϕ ( w ) is the state M  ends up in after
reading the string w . Thus, M  accepts a string w  if and only if ϕ ( w ) ∈  A .
W e define the function ϕ  recursively , using the transition function:
Page number: 1132
ϕ ( ϵ ) = q 0 ,
ϕ ( wa ) = δ ( ϕ ( w ), a ) for w  ∈  ∑*, a  ∈  ∑.
String-matching automata
For a given pattern P , a preprocessing step constructs a string-matching
automaton specific to P . The automaton then searches the text string for
occurrences of P . Figure 32.6  illustrates the automaton for the pattern P  =
ababaca . From now on, let’ s assume that P  is fixed, and for brevity , we
won’ t bother to indicate the dependence upon P  in our notation.
In order to specify the string-matching automaton corresponding to a
given pattern P [1: m ], we first define an auxiliary function σ , called the
suf fix function  corresponding to the pattern P . The function σ  maps ∑* to
{0, 1, …, m } such that σ ( x ) is the length of the longest prefix of P  that is
also a suf fix of x :

Page number: 1133
Figur e 32.6 (a)  A state-transition diagram for the string-matching automaton that accepts all strings
ending in the string ababaca . State 0 is the start state, and state 7 (in orange) is the only accepting
state. The transition function δ  is defined by equation (32.4), and a directed edge from state i  to state j
labeled a  represents δ ( i , a ) = j . The right-going edges forming the “spine” of the automaton, shown in
blue, correspond to successful matches between pattern and input characters. Except for the edges
from state 7 to states 1 and 2, the left-going edges correspond to mismatches. Some edges
corresponding to mismatches are omitted: by convention, if a state i  has no outgoing edge labeled a
for some a  ∈  ∑, then δ ( i , a ) = 0. (b)  The corresponding transition function δ , and the pattern string P
= ababaca . The entries corresponding to successful matches between pattern and input characters
are shown in blue. (c)  The operation of the automaton on the text T  = abababacaba . Under each
text character T [ i ] appears the state ϕ ( T [: i ]) that the automaton is in after processing the prefix T [: i ].
The substring of the pattern that occurs in the text is highlighted in blue. The automaton finds this
one occurrence of the pattern, ending in position 9.
The suf fix function σ  is well defined since the empty string P [:0] = ϵ  is a
suf fix of every string. As examples, for the pattern P  = ab , we have σ ( ε ) =
0, σ (ccaca ) = 1, and σ (ccab ) = 2. For a pattern P  of length m , we have
σ ( x ) = m  if and only if P  ⊐  x . From the definition of the suf fix function, x  ⊐
y  implies σ ( x ) ≤ σ ( y ) (see Exercise 32.3-4).
W e are now ready to define the string-matching automaton that
corresponds to a given pattern P [1: m ]:
Page number: 1134
The state set Q  is {0, 1, …, m }. The start state q0  is state 0, and state
m  is the only accepting state.
The transition function δ  is defined, for any state q  and character a ,
by
As the automaton consumes characters of the text T , it is trying to build
a match of the pattern P  against the most recently seen characters of T . At
any time, the state number q  gives the length of the longest prefix of P  that
matches the most recently seen text characters. Whenever the automaton
reaches state m , the m  most recently seen text characters match the first m
characters of P . Since P  has length m , reaching state m  means that the m
most recently seen text characters match the entire pattern, so that the
automaton has found a match.
W ith this intuition behind the design of the automaton, here is the
reasoning behind defining δ ( q , a ) = σ ( P [: q ] a ). Suppose that the automaton
is in state q  after reading the first i  characters of the text, that is, q  =
ϕ ( T [: i ]). The intuitive idea then says that q  also equals the length of the
longest prefix of P  that matches a suf fix of T [: i ] or , equivalently , that q  =
σ ( T [: i ]). Thus, since ϕ ( T [: i ]) and σ ( T [: i ]) both equal q , we will see (in
Theorem 32.4 on page 973) that the automaton maintains the following
invariant:
If the automaton is in state q  and reads the next character T [ i  + 1] = a , then
the transition should lead to the state corresponding to the longest prefix of
P  that is a suf fix of T [: i ] a . That state is σ ( T [: i ] a ), and equation (32.5) gives
ϕ ( T [: i ] a ) = σ ( T [: i ] a ). Because P [: q ] is the longest prefix of P  that is a suf fix
of T [: i ], the longest prefix of P  that is a suf fix of T [: i ] a  has length not only
σ ( T [: i ] a ), but also σ ( P [: q ] a ), and so ϕ ( T [: i ] a ) = σ ( P [: q ] a ). (Lemma 32.3 on
page 972 will prove that σ ( T [: i ] a ) = σ ( P [: q ] a ).) Thus, when the automaton
is in state q , the transition function δ  on character a  should take the
automaton to state δ ( q , a ) = δ ( ϕ ( T [: i ]), a ) = ϕ ( T [: i ] a ) = σ ( P [: q ] a ) (with the
last equality following from equation (32.5)).
There are two cases to consider , depending on whether the next
character continues to match the pattern. In the first case, a  = P [ q  + 1], so
Page number: 1135
that the character a  continues to match the pattern. In this case, because δ ( q ,
a ) = q  + 1, the transition continues to go along the “spine” of the automaton
(the blue edges in Figure 32.6(a) ). In the second case, a  ≠ P [ q  + 1], so that a
does not extend the match being built. In this case, we need to find the
longest prefix of P  that is also a suf fix of T [: i ] a , which will have length at
most q . The preprocessing step matches the pattern against itself when
creating the string-matching automaton, so that the transition function can
quickly identify the longest such smaller prefix of P .
Let’ s look at an example. Consider state 5 in the string-matching
automaton of Figure 32.6 . In state 5, the five most recently read characters
of T  are ababa , the characters along the spine of the automaton that reach
state 5. If the next character of T  is c , then the most recently read characters
of T  are ababac , which is the prefix of P  with length 6. The automaton
should continue along the spine to state 6. This is the first case, in which the
match continues, and δ (5, c ) = 6. T o illustrate the second case, suppose that
in state 5, the next character of T  is b , so the most recently read characters
of T  are ababab . Here, the longest prefix of P  that matches the most
recently read characters of T —that is, a suf fix of the portion of T  read so far
—is abab , with length 4, so δ (5, b ) = 4.
T o clarify the operation of a string-matching automaton, the simple and
ef ficient procedure F INITE -A UT OMA T ON -M A TCHER  simulates the behavior of
such an automaton (represented by its transition function δ ) in finding
occurrences of a pattern P  of length m  in an input text T [1: n ]. As for any
string-matching automaton for a pattern of length m , the state set Q  is {0, 1,
…, m }, the start state is 0, and the only accepting state is state m . From the
simple loop structure of F INITE -A UT OMA T ON -M A TCHER , you can see that its
matching time on a text string of length n  is Θ( n ), assuming that each
lookup of the transition function δ  takes constant time. This matching time,
however , does not include the preprocessing time required to compute the
transition function. W e address this problem later , after first proving that the
procedure F INITE -A UT OMA T ON -M A TCHER  operates correctly .
F INITE -A UT OMA T ON -M A TCHER ( T , δ , n , m )
1 q  = 0
2 for  i  = 1 to  n
3 q  = δ ( q , T [ i ])
4 if  q  == m
5 print “Pattern occurs with shift” i  – m
Page number: 1136
Let’ s examine how the automaton operates on an input text T [1: n ]. W e
will prove that the automaton is in state σ ( T [: i ]) after reading character T [ i ].
Since σ ( T [: i ]) = m  if and only if P  ⊐  T [: i ], the machine is in the accepting
state m  if and only if it has just read the pattern P . W e start with two
lemmas about the suf fix function σ .
Lemma 32.2 (Suf fix-function inequality)
For any string x  and character a , we have σ ( xa ) ≤ σ ( x ) + 1.
Figur e 32.7  An illustration for the proof of Lemma 32.2. The figure shows that r  ≤ σ ( x ) + 1, where r
= σ ( xa ).
Figur e 32.8  An illustration for the proof of Lemma 32.3. The figure shows that r  = σ ( P [: q ] a ), where
q  = σ ( x ) and r  = σ ( xa ).
Proof    Referring to Figure 32.7 , let r  = σ ( xa ). If r  = 0, then the conclusion
σ ( xa ) = r  ≤ σ ( x )+1 is trivially satisfied since σ ( x ) is nonnegative. Now
assume that r  > 0. Then, P [: r ] ⊐  xa , by the definition of σ . Thus, P [: r  − 1]
⊐  x , by dropping the a  from both the end of P [: r ] and the end of xa .
Therefore, r  – 1 ≤ σ ( x ), since σ ( x ) is the lar gest k  such that P [: k ] ⊐  x , and
thus σ ( xa ) = r  ≤ σ ( x ) + 1.
▪
Lemma 32.3 (Suf fix-function recursion lemma)
For any string x  and character a , if q  = σ ( x ), then σ ( xa ) = σ ( P [: q ] a ).
Page number: 1137
Proof    The definition of σ  gives that P [: q ] ⊐  x . As Figure 32.8  shows, we
also have P [: q ] a  ⊐  xa . Let r  = σ ( xa ). Then P [: r ] ⊐  xa  and, by Lemma 32.2,
r  ≤ q  + 1. Thus, we have | P [: r ]| = r  ≤ q  + 1 = | P [: q ] a |. Since P [: q ] a  ⊐  xa ,
P [: r ] ⊐  xa , and | P [: r ]| ≤ | P [: q ] a |, Lemma 32.1 on page 959 implies that
P [: r ] ⊐  P [: q ] a . Therefore, r  ≤ ( P [: q ] a ), that is, σ ( xa ) ≤ σ ( P [: q ] a ). But we
also have σ ( P [: q ] a ) ≤ σ ( xa ), since P [: q ] a  ⊐  xa . Thus, σ ( xa ) = σ ( P [: q ] a ).
▪
W e are now ready to prove the main theorem characterizing the behavior
of a string-matching automaton on a given input text. As noted above, this
theorem shows that the automaton is merely keeping track, at each step, of
the longest prefix of the pattern that is a suf fix of what has been read so far .
In other words, the automaton maintains the invariant (32.5).
Theorem 32.4
If ϕ  is the final-state function of a string-matching automaton for a given
pattern P  and T [1: n ] is an input text for the automaton, then
ϕ ( T [: i ]) = σ ( T [: i ])
for i  = 0, 1, …, n .
Proof    The proof is by induction on i . For i  = 0, the theorem is trivially
true, since T [:0] = ε . Thus, ϕ ( T [:0]) = 0 = σ ( T [:0]).
Now assume that ϕ ( T [: i ]) = σ ( T [: i ]). W e will prove that ϕ ( T [: i  + 1]) =
σ ( T [: i  + 1]). Let q  denote ϕ ( T [: i ]), so that q  = σ ( T [: i ]), and let a  denote T [ i  +
1]. Then,
ϕ ( T [: i  + 1]) = ϕ ( T [: i ] a ) (by the definitions of T [: i  + 1] and a )
= δ ( ϕ ( T [: i ]), a ) (by the definition of ϕ )
= δ ( q , a ) (by the definition of q )
= σ ( P [: q ] a ) (by the definition (32.4) of δ )
= σ ( T [: i ] a ) (by Lemma 32.3)
= ( T [: i  + 1]) (by the definition of T [: i  + 1]).
▪
By Theorem 32.4, if the machine enters state q  on line 3, then q  is the
lar gest value such that P [: q ] ⊐  T [: i ]. Thus, in line 4, q  = m  if and only if the
machine has just read an occurrence of the pattern P . Therefore, F INITE -
A UT OMA T ON -M A TCHER  operates correctly .
Page number: 1138
Computing the transition function
The procedure C OMPUTE -T RANSITION -F UNCTION  on the following page
computes the transition function δ  from a given pattern P [1: m ]. It computes
δ ( q , a ) in a straightforward manner according to its definition in equation
(32.4). The nested loops beginning on lines 1 and 2 consider all states q  and
all characters a , and lines 3–6 set δ ( q , a ) to be the lar gest k  such that P [: k ]
⊐  P [: q ] a . The code starts with the lar gest conceivable value of k , which is
q +1, unless q  = m , in which case k  cannot be lar ger than m . It then decreases
k  until P [: k ] is a suf fix of P [: q ] a , which must eventually occur , since P [:0] =
ε  is a suf fix of every string.
C OMPUTE -T RANSITION -F UNCTION ( P , ∑, m )
1 for  q  = 0 to  m
2 for  each character a  ∈  ∑
3 k  = min { m , q  + 1}
4 while  P [: k ] is not a suf fix of P [: q ] a
5 k  = k  – 1
6 δ ( q , a ) = k
7 r eturn  δ
The running time of C OMPUTE -T RANSITION -F UNCTION  is O ( m3 |∑|),
because the outer loops contribute a factor of m  |∑|, the inner while  loop
can run at most m  + 1 times, and the test for whether P [: k ] is a suf fix of
P [: q ] a  on line 4 can require comparing up to m  characters. Much faster
procedures exist. By utilizing some cleverly computed information about
the pattern P  (see Exercise 32.4-8), the time required to compute δ  from P
improves to O ( m  |∑|). This improved procedure for computing δ  provides a
way to find all occurrences of a length- m  pattern in a length- n  text over an
alphabet ∑ with O ( m  |∑|) preprocessing time and Θ( n ) matching time.
Exer cises
32.3-1
Draw a state-transition diagram for the string-matching automaton for the
pattern P  = aabab  over the alphabet ∑ = { a , b } and illustrate its operation
on the text string T  = aaababaabaababaab .
32.3-2
Page number: 1139
Draw a state-transition diagram for the string-matching automaton for the
pattern P  = ababbabbababbababbabb  over the alphabet ∑ = { a , b }.
32.3-3
A pattern P  is nonoverlappable  if P [: k ] ⊐  P [: q ] implies k  = 0 or k  = q .
Describe the state-transition diagram of the string-matching automaton for a
nonoverlappable pattern.
32.3-4
Let x  and y  be prefixes of the pattern P . Prove that x  ⊐  y  implies σ ( x ) ≤
σ ( y ).
★  32.3-5
Given two patterns P  and P ′, describe how to construct a finite automaton
that determines all occurrences of either  pattern. T ry to minimize the
number of states in your automaton.
32.3-6
Given a pattern P  containing gap characters (see Exercise 32.1-4), show
how to build a finite automaton that can find an occurrence of P  in a text T
in O ( n ) matching time, where n  = | T |.
★  32.4 The Knuth-Morris-Pratt algorithm
Knuth, Morris, and Pratt developed a linear -time string matching algorithm
that avoids computing the transition function δ  altogether . Instead, the KMP
algorithm uses an auxiliary function π , which it precomputes from the
pattern in Θ( m ) time and stores in an array π [1: m ]. The array π  allows the
algorithm to compute the transition function δ  ef ficiently (in an amortized
sense) “on the fly” as needed. Loosely speaking, for any state q  = 0, 1, …,
m  and any character a  ∈  ∑, the value π [ q ] contains the information needed
to compute δ ( q , a ) but that does not depend on a . Since the array π  has only
m  entries, whereas δ  has Θ( m  |∑|) entries, the KMP algorithm saves a factor
of |∑| in the preprocessing time by computing π  rather than δ . Like the
procedure F INITE -A UT OMA T ON -M A TCHER , once preprocessing has
completed, the KMP algorithm uses Θ( n ) matching time.
The pr efix function for a pattern
Page number: 1140
The prefix function π  for a pattern encapsulates knowledge about how the
pattern matches against shifts of itself. The KMP algorithm takes advantage
of this information to avoid testing useless shifts in the naive pattern-
matching algorithm and to avoid precomputing the full transition function δ
for a string-matching automaton.
Consider the operation of the naive string matcher . Figure 32.9(a)  shows
a particular shift s  of a template containing the pattern P  = ababaca
against a text T . For this example, q  = 5 of the characters have matched
successfully , but the 6th pattern character fails to match the corresponding
text character . The information that q  characters have matched successfully
determines the corresponding text characters. Because these q  text
characters match, certain shifts must be invalid. In the example of the
figure, the shift s  + 1 is necessarily invalid, since the first pattern character
(a ) would be aligned with a text character that does not match the first
pattern character , but does match the second pattern character ( b ). The shift
s ′ = s  + 2 shown in part (b) of the figure, however , aligns the first three
pattern characters with three text characters that necessarily match.
More generally , suppose that you know that P [: q ] ⊐  T [: s  + q ] or ,
equivalently , that P [1: q ] = T [ s  + 1: s  + q ]. Y ou want to shift P  so that some
shorter prefix P [: k ] of P  matches a suf fix of T [: s  + q ], if possible. Y ou might
have more than one choice for how much to shift, however . In Figure
32.9(b) , shifting P  by 2 positions works, so that P [:3] ⊐  T [: s  + q ], but so
does shifting P  by 4 positions, so that P [:1] ⊐  T [: s  + q ] in Figure 32.9(c) . If
more than one shift amount works, you should choose the smallest shift
amount so that you do not miss any potential matches. Put more precisely ,
you want to answer this question:
Given that pattern characters P [1: q ] match text characters T [ s  + 1: s
+ q ] (that is, P [: q ] ⊐  T [: s  + q ]), what is the least shift s ′ > s  such
that for some k  < q ,
(that is, P [: k ] ⊐  T [: s ′ + k ]), where s ′ + k  = s  + q ?
Here’ s another way to look at this question. If you know P [: q ] ⊐  T [: s  +
q ], then how do you find the longest proper prefix P [: k ] of P [: q ] that is also
a suf fix of T [: s  + q ]? These questions are equivalent because given s  and q ,
Page number: 1141
requiring s ′ + k  = s  + q  means that finding the smallest shift s ′ (2 in Figure
32.9(b) ) is tantamount to finding the longest prefix length k  (3 in Figure
32.9(b) ). If you add the dif ference q  – k  in the lengths of these prefixes of P
to the shift s , you get the new shift s ′, so that s ′ = s  + ( q  – k ). In the best
case, k  = 0, so that s ′ = s  + q , immediately ruling out shifts s  + 1, s  + 2, …, s
+ q  − 1. In any case, at the new shift s ′, it is redundant to compare the first k
characters of P  with the corresponding characters of T , since equation
(32.6) guarantees that they match.
As Figure 32.9(d)  demonstrates, you can precompute the necessary
information by comparing the pattern against itself. Since T [ s ′ + 1: s ′ + k ] is
part of the matched portion of the text, it is a suf fix of the string P [: q ].
Therefore, think of equation (32.6) as asking for the greatest k  < q  such that
P [: k ] ⊐  P [: q ]. Then, the new shift s ′ = s  + ( q  – k ) is the next potentially
valid shift. It will be convenient to store, for each value of q , the number k
of matching characters at the new shift s ′, rather than storing, say , the
amount s ′ – s  to shift by .
Let’ s look at the precomputed information a little more formally . For a
given pattern P [1: m ], the prefix function  for P  is the function π  : {1, 2, …,
m } → {0, 1, …, m  –} such that
π [ q ] = max{ k  : k  < q  and P [: k ] ⊐  P [: q ]}.
That is, π [ q ] is the length of the longest prefix of P  that is a proper suf fix of
P [: q ]. Here is the complete prefix function π  for the pattern ababaca :
Page number: 1142
Figur e 32.9  The prefix function π . (a)  The pattern P  = ababaca  aligns with a text T  so that the first
q  = 5 characters match. Matching characters, in blue, are connected by blue lines. (b)  Knowing these
particular 5 matched characters ( P [:5]) suf fices to deduce that a shift of s  + 1 is invalid, but that a
shift of s ′ = s  + 2 is consistent with everything known about the text and therefore is potentially valid.
The prefix P [: k ], where k  = 3, aligns with the text seen so far . (c)  A shift of s  + 4 is also potentially
valid, but it leaves only the prefix P [:1] aligned with the text seen so far . (d)  T o precompute useful
information for such deductions, compare the pattern with itself. Here, the longest prefix of P  that is
also a proper suf fix of P [:5] is P [:3]. The array π  represents this precomputed information, so that
π [5] = 3. Given that q  characters have matched successfully at shift s , the next potentially valid shift
is at s ′ = s  + ( q  – π [ q ]) as shown in part (b).
The procedure KMP-M A TCHER  on the following page gives the Knuth-
Morris-Pratt matching algorithm. The procedure follows from F INITE -
A UT OMA T ON -M A TCHER  for the most part. T o compute π , KMP-M A TCHER
calls the auxiliary procedure C OMPUTE -P REFIX -F UNCTION . These two
procedures have much in common, because both match a string against the
pattern P : KMP-M A TCHER  matches the text T  against P , and C OMPUTE -
P REFIX -F UNCTION  matches P  against itself.
Next, let’ s analyze the running times of these procedures. Then we’ll
prove them correct, which will be more complicated.
Running-time analysis
The running time of C OMPUTE -P REFIX -F UNCTION  is Θ( m ), which we show
by using the aggregate method of amortized analysis (see Section 16.1 ).
The only tricky part is showing that the while  loop of lines 5–6 executes
O ( m ) times altogether . Starting with some observations about k , we’ll show
Page number: 1143
that it makes at most m –1 iterations. First, line 3 starts k  at 0, and the only
way that k  increases is by the increment operation in line 8, which executes
at most once per iteration of the for  loop of lines 4–9. Thus, the total
increase in k  is at most m –1. Second, since k  < q  upon entering the for  loop
and each iteration of the loop increments q , we always have k  < q .
Therefore, the assignments in lines 2 and 9 ensure that π [ q ] < q  for all q  = 1,
2, …, m , which means that each iteration of the while  loop decreases k .
Third, k  never becomes negative. Putting these facts together , we see that
the total decrease in k  from the while  loop is bounded from above by the
total increase in k  over all iterations of the for  loop, which is m  – 1. Thus,
the while  loop iterates at most m  – 1 times in all, and C OMPUTE -P REFIX -
F UNCTION  runs in Θ( m ) time.
KMP-M A TCHER ( T , P , n , m )
  1 π  = C OMPUTE -P REFIX -F UNCTION ( P , m )
  2 q  = 0 //  number of characters matched
  3 for  i  = 1 to  n //  scan the text from left to right
  4 while  q  > 0 and P [ q  + 1] ≠ T [ i ]
  5 q  = π [ q ] //  next character does not match
  6 if  P [ q  + 1] == T [ i ]
  7 q  = q  + 1 //  next character matches
  8 if  q  == m //  is all of P  matched?
  9 print “Pattern occurs with shift” i  – m
10 q  = π [ q ] //  look for the next match
C OMPUTE -P REFIX -F UNCTION ( P , m )
  1 let π [1: m ] be a new array
  2 π [1] = 0
  3 k  = 0
  4 for  q  = 2 to  m
  5 while  k  > 0 and P [ k  + 1] ≠ P [ q ]
  6 k  = π [ k ]
  7 if  P [ k  + 1] == P [ q ]
  8 k  = k  + 1
  9 π [ q ] = k
10 r eturn  π
Exercise 32.4-4 asks you to show , by a similar aggregate analysis, that
the matching time of KMP-M A TCHER  is Θ( n ).
Page number: 1144
Figur e 32.10  An illustration of Lemma 32.5 for the pattern P  = ababaca  and q  = 5. (a)  The π
function for the given pattern. Since π [5] = 3, π [3] = 1, and π [1]= 0, iterating π  gives π *[5] = {3, 1,
0}. (b)  Sliding the template containing the pattern P  to the right and noting when some prefix P [: k ]
of P  matches up with some proper suf fix of P [:5]. Matches occur when k  = 3, 1, and 0. In the figure,
the first row gives P , and the vertical red line is drawn just after P [:5]. Successive rows show all the
shifts of P  that cause some prefix P [: k ] of P  to match some suf fix of P [:5]. Successfully matched
characters are shown in blue. Blue lines connect aligned matching characters. Thus, { k  : k  < 5 and
P [: k ] ⊐  P [:5]} = {3, 1, 0}. Lemma 32.5 claims that π *[ q ] = { k  : k  < q  and P [: k ] ⊐  P [: q ]} for all q .
Compared with F INITE -A UT OMA T ON -M A TCHER , by using π  rather than δ ,
the KMP algorithm reduces the time for preprocessing the pattern from O ( m
|∑|) to Θ( m ), while keeping the actual matching time bounded by Θ( n ).
Corr ectness of the pr efix-function computation
W e’ll see a little later that the prefix function π  helps to simulate the
transition function δ  in a string-matching automaton. But first, we need to
prove that the procedure C OMPUTE -P REFIX -F UNCTION  does indeed compute
the prefix function correctly . Doing so requires finding all prefixes P [: k ]
that are proper suf fixes of a given prefix P [: q ]. The value of π [ q ] gives us
the length of the longest such prefix, but the following lemma, illustrated in
Figure 32.10 , shows that iterating the prefix function π  generates all the
prefixes P [: k ] that are proper suf fixes of P [: q ]. Let
π *[ q ] = { π [ q ], π(2)[ q ], π(3)[ q ], …, π( t )[ q ]},
where π( i )[ q ] is defined in terms of functional iteration, so that π(0)[ q ] = q
and π( i )[ q ] = π [ π( i −1)[ q ]] for i  ≥ 1 (so that π [ q ] = π(1)[ q ]), and where the
sequence in π *[ q ] stops upon reaching π( t )[ q ] = 0 for some t  ≥ 1.
Lemma 32.5 (Prefix-function iteration lemma)
Page number: 1145
Let P  be a pattern of length m  with prefix function π . Then, for q  = 1, 2, …,
m , we have π *[ q ] = { k  : k  < q  and P [: k ] ⊐  P [: q ]}.
Proof    W e first prove that π *[ q ] ⊆  { k  : k  < q  and P [: k ] ⊐  P [: q ]} or ,
equivalently ,
If i  ∈  π *[ q ], then i  = π( u )[ q ] for some u  > 0. W e prove equation (32.7) by
induction on u . For u  = 1, we have i  = π [ q ], and the claim follows since i  <
q  and P [: π [ q ]] ⊐  P [: q ] by the definition of π . Now consider some u  ≥ 1
such that both π( u )[ q ] and π( u +1)[ q ] belong to π *[ q ]. Let i  = π( u )[ q ], so that
π [ i ] = π( u +1)[ q ]. The inductive hypothesis is that P [: i ] ⊐  P [: q ]. Because the
relations < and ⊐  are transitive, we have π [ i ] < i  < q  and P [: π [ i ]] ⊐  P [: i ] ⊐
P [: q ], which establishes equation (32.7) for all i  in π *[ q ]. Therefore, π *[ q ]
⊆  { k  : k  < q  and P [: k ] ⊐  P [: q ]}.
W e now prove that { k  : k  < q  and P [: k ] ⊐  P [: q ]} ⊆  π *[ q ] by
contradiction. Suppose to the contrary that the set { k  : k  < q  and P [: k ] ⊐
P [: q ]} – π *[ q ] is nonempty , and let j  be the lar gest number in the set.
Because π [ q ] is the lar gest value in { k  : k  < q  and P [: k ] ⊐  P [: q ]} and π *[ q ]
∈  π *[ q ], it must be the case that j  < [ q ]. Having established that π *[ q ]
contains at least one integer greater than j , let j ′ denote the smallest such
integer . (W e can choose j ′ = π [ q ] if no other number in π *[ q ] is greater than
j .) W e have P [: j ] ⊐  P [: q ] because j  ∈  { k  : k  < q  and P [: k ] ⊐  P [: q ]}, and
from j ′ ∈  π *[ q ] and equation (32.7), we have P [: j ′] ⊐  P [: q ]. Thus, P [: j ] ⊐
P [: j ′] by Lemma 32.1, and j  is the lar gest value less than j ′ with this
property . Therefore, we must have π [ j ′] = j  and, since j ′ ∈  π *[ q ], we must
have j  ∈  π *[ q ] as well. This contradiction proves the lemma.
▪
The algorithm C OMPUTE -P REFIX -F UNCTION  computes π [ q ], in order , for q
= 1, 2, …, m . Setting π [1] to 0 in line 2 of C OMPUTE -P REFIX -F UNCTION  is
certainly correct, since π [ q ] < q  for all q . W e’ll use the following lemma and
its corollary to prove that C OMPUTE -P REFIX -F UNCTION  computes π [ q ]
correctly for q  > 1.
Lemma 32.6
Page number: 1146
Let P  be a pattern of length m , and let π  be the prefix function for P . For q  =
1, 2, …, m , if π [ q ] > 0, then π [ q ] – 1 ∈  π *[ q  – 1].
Proof    Let r  = π [ q ] > 0, so that r  < q  and P [: r ] ⊐  P [: q ], and thus, r  – 1 < q
– 1 and P [: r  – 1] ⊐  P [: q  – 1] (by dropping the last character from P [: r ] and
P [: q ], which we can do because r  > 0). By Lemma 32.5, therefore, r  – 1 ∈
π *[ q  – 1]. Thus, we have π [ q ] – 1 = r  – 1 ∈  π *[ q  – 1].
▪
For q  = 2, 3, …, m , define the subset Eq –1  ⊆  π *[ q  – 1] by
E q –1 = { k  ∈  π *[ q  – 1]: P [ k  + 1] = P [ q ]}
= { k  : k  < q  – 1 and P [: k ] ⊐  P [: q  – 1] and P [ k  + 1] = P [ q ]}
(by Lemma 32.5)
= { k  : k  < q  – 1 and P [: k  + 1] ⊐  P [: q ]}.
The set Eq –1  consists of the values k  < q  – 1 for which P [: k ] ⊐  P [: q  – 1] and
for which, because P [ k  + 1] = P [ q ], we have P [: k  + 1] ⊐  P [: q ]. Thus, Eq –1
consists of those values k  ∈  π *[ q  – 1] such that extending P [: k ] to P [: k  + 1]
produces a proper suf fix of P [: q ].
Corollary 32.7
Let P  be a pattern of length m , and let π  be the prefix function for P . Then,
for q  = 2, 3, …, m ,
Proof    If Eq –1  is empty , there is no k  ∈  π *[ q  – 1] (including k  = 0) such that
extending P [: k ] to P [: k  + 1] produces a proper suf fix of P [: q ]. Therefore,
π [ q ]= 0.
If, instead, Eq –1  is nonempty , then for each k  ∈  Eq –1 , we have k  + 1 < q
and P [: k  + 1] ⊐  P [: q ]. Therefore, the definition of π [ q ] gives
Note that π [ q ] > 0. Let r  = π [ q ] – 1, so that r  + 1 = π [ q ] > 0, and therefore
P [: r  + 1] ⊐  P [: q ]. If a nonempty string is a suf fix of another , then the two
strings must have the same last character . Since r  + 1 > 0, the prefix P [: r  +
Page number: 1147
1] is nonempty , and so P [ r  + 1] = P [ q ]. Furthermore, r  ∈  π *[ q  – 1] by
Lemma 32.6. Therefore, r  ∈  Eq –1 , and so π [ q ] – 1 = r  ≤ max Eq –1  or ,
equivalently ,
Combining equations (32.8) and (32.9) completes the proof.
▪
W e now finish the proof that C OMPUTE -P REFIX -F UNCTION  computes π
correctly . The key is to combine the definition of Eq –1  with the statement of
Corollary 32.7, so that π [ q ] equals 1 plus the greatest value of k  in π *[ q  – 1]
such that P [ k  + 1] = P [ q ]. First, in C OMPUTE -P REFIX -F UNCTION , k  = π [ q  – 1]
at the start of each iteration of the for  loop of lines 4–9. This condition is
enforced by lines 2 and 3 when the loop is first entered, and it remains true
in each successive iteration because of line 9. Lines 5–8 adjust k  so that it
becomes the correct value of π [ q ]. The while  loop of lines 5–6 searches
through all values k  ∈  π *[ q  – 1] in decreasing order to find the value of
π [ q ]. The loop terminates either because k  reaches 0 or P [ k  + 1] = P [ q ].
Because the “and” operator short-circuits, if the loop terminates because
P [ k  + 1] = P [ q ], then k  must have also been positive, and so k  is the greatest
value in Eq –1 . In this case, lines 7–9 set π [ q ] to k  + 1, according to Corollary
32.7. If, instead, the while  loop terminates because k  = 0, then there are two
possibilities. If P [1] = P [ q ], then Eq –1  = {0}, and lines 7–9 set both k  and
π [ q ] to 1. If k  = 0 and P [1] ≠ P [ q ], however , then Eq –1  = ø;. In this case, line
9 sets π [ q ] to 0, again according to Corollary 32.7, which completes the
proof of the correctness of C OMPUTE -P REFIX -F UNCTION .
Corr ectness of the Knuth-Morris-Pratt algorithm
Y ou can think of the procedure KMP-M A TCHER  as a reimplemented version
of the procedure F INITE -A UT OMA T ON -M A TCHER , but using the prefix
function π  to compute state transitions. Specifically , we’ll prove that in the
i th iteration of the for  loops of both KMP-M A TCHER  and F INITE -
A UT OMA T ON -M A TCHER , the state q  has the same value upon testing for
equality with m  (at line 8 in KMP-M A TCHER  and at line 4 in F INITE -
A UT OMA T ON -M A TCHER ). Once we have ar gued that KMP-M A TCHER
simulates the behavior of F INITE -A UT OMA T ON -M A TCHER , the correctness of
Page number: 1148
KMP-M A TCHER  follows from the correctness of F INITE -A UT OMA T ON -
M A TCHER  (though we’ll see a little later why line 10 in KMP-M A TCHER  is
necessary).
Before formally proving that KMP-M A TCHER  correctly simulates F INITE -
A UT OMA T ON -M A TCHER , let’ s take a moment to understand how the prefix
function π  replaces the δ  transition function. Recall that when a string-
matching automaton is in state q  and it scans a character a  = T [ i ], it moves
to a new state δ ( q , a ). If a  = P [ q  + 1], so that a  continues to match the
pattern, then the state number is incremented: δ ( q , a ) = q  + 1. Otherwise, a
≠ P [ q  + 1], so that a  does not continue to match the pattern, and the state
number does not increase: 0 ≤ δ ( q , a ) ≤ q . In the first case, when a
continues to match, KMP-M A TCHER  moves to state q  + 1 without referring
to the π  function: the while  loop test in line 4 immediately comes up false,
the test in line 6 comes up true, and line 7 increments q .
The π  function comes into play when the character a  does not continue
to match the pattern, so that the new state δ ( q , a ) is either q  or to the left of
q  along the spine of the automaton. The while  loop of lines 4–5 in KMP-
M A TCHER  iterates through the states in π *[ q ], stopping either when it arrives
in a state, say q ′, such that a  matches P [ q ′ + 1] or q ′ has gone all the way
down to 0. If a  matches P [ q ′ + 1], then line 7 sets the new state to q ′+1,
which should equal δ ( q , a ) for the simulation to work correctly . In other
words, the new state δ ( q , a ) should be either state 0 or a state numbered 1
more than some state in π *[ q ].
Let’ s look at the example in Figures 32.6  and 32.10 , which are for the
pattern P  = ababaca . Suppose that the automaton is in state q  = 5, having
matched ababa . The states in π *[5] are, in descending order , 3, 1, and 0. If
the next character scanned is c , then you can see that the automaton moves
to state δ (5, c ) = 6 in both F INITE -A UT OMA T ON -M A TCHER  (line 3) and KMP-
M A TCHER  (line 7). Now suppose that the next character scanned is instead
b , so that the automaton should move to state δ (5, b ) = 4. The while  loop in
KMP-M A TCHER  exits after executing line 5 once, and the automaton arrives
in state q ′ = π [5] = 3. Since P [ q ′ + 1] = P [4] = b , the test in line 6 comes up
true, and the automaton moves to the new state q ′ + 1 = 4 = δ (5, b ). Finally ,
suppose that the next character scanned is instead a , so that the automaton
should move to state δ (5, a ) = 1. The first three times that the test in line 4
executes, the test comes up true. The first time finds that P [6] = c  ≠ a , and
the automaton moves to state π [5] = 3 (the first state in π *[5]). The second
Page number: 1149
time finds that P [4] = b  ≠ a , and the automaton moves to state π [3] = 1 (the
second state in π *[5]). The third time finds that P [2] = b  ≠ a , and the
automaton moves to state π [1] = 0 (the last state in π *[5]). The while  loop
exits once it arrives in state q ′ = 0. Now line 6 finds that P [ q ′ + 1] = P [1] =
a , and line 7 moves the automaton to the new state q ′ + 1 = 1 = δ (5, a ).
Thus, the intuition is that KMP-M A TCHER  iterates through the states in
π *[ q ] in decreasing order , stopping at some state q ′ and then possibly
moving to state q ′+1. Although that might seem like a lot of work just to
simulate computing δ ( q , a ), bear in mind that asymptotically , KMP-
M A TCHER  is no slower than F INITE -A UT OMA T ON -M A TCHER .
W e are now ready to formally prove the correctness of the Knuth-
Morris-Pratt algorithm. By Theorem 32.4, we have that q  = σ ( T [: i ]) after
each time line 3 of F INITE -A UT OMA T ON -M A TCHER  executes. Therefore, it
suf fices to show that the same property holds with regard to the for  loop in
KMP-M A TCHER . The proof proceeds by induction on the number of loop
iterations. Initially , both procedures set q  to 0 as they enter their respective
for  loops for the first time. Consider iteration i  of the for  loop in KMP-
M A TCHER . By the inductive hypothesis, the state number q  equals σ ( T [: i  –
1]) at the start of the loop iteration. W e need to show that when line 8 is
reached, the new value of q  is σ ( T [: i ]). (Again, we’ll handle line 10
separately .)
Considering q  to be the state number at the start of the for  loop iteration,
when KMP-M A TCHER  considers the character T [ i ], the longest prefix of P
that is a suf fix of T [: i ] is either P [: q  + 1] (if P [ q  + 1] = T [ i ]) or some prefix
(not necessarily proper , and possibly empty) of P [: q ]. W e consider
separately the three cases in which σ ( T [: i ]) = 0, σ ( T [: i ]) = q  + 1, and 0 <
σ ( T [: i ]) ≤ q .
If σ ( T [: i ]) = 0, then P [:0] = ϵ  is the only prefix of P  that is a suf fix of
T [: i ]. The while  loop of lines 4–5 iterates through each value q ′ in π *
[ q ], but although P [: q ′] ⊐  P [: q ] ⊐  T [: i  – 1] for every q ′ ∈  π *[ q ]
(because < are ⊐  are transitive relations), the loop never finds a q ′
such that P [ q ′ + 1] = T [ i ]. The loop terminates when q  reaches 0, and
of course line 7 does not execute. Therefore, q  = 0 at line 8, so that
now q  = σ ( T [: i ]).
If σ ( T [: i ]) = q +1, then P [ q +1] = T [ i ], and the while  loop test in line 4
fails the first time through. Line 7 executes, incrementing the state
Page number: 1150
number to q  + 1, which equals σ ( T [: i ]).
If 0 < σ ( T [: i ]) ≤ q ′, then the while  loop of lines 4–5 iterates at least
once, checking in decreasing order each value in π *[ q ] until it stops
at some q ′ < q . Thus, P [: q ′] is the longest prefix of P [: q ] for which
P [ q ′ + 1] = T [ i ], so that when the while  loop terminates, q ′ + 1 =
σ ( P [: q ] T [ i ]). Since q  = σ ( T [: i  – 1]), Lemma 32.3 implies that σ ( T [: i  –
1] T [ i ]) = σ ( P [: q ] T [ i ]). Thus we have
q ′ + 1 = σ ( P [: q ] T [ i ])
= σ ( T [: i  – 1] T [ i ])
= σ ( T [: i ])
when the while  loop terminates. After line 7 increments q , the new
state number q  equals σ ( T [: i ]).
Line 10 is necessary in KMP-M A TCHER , because otherwise, line 4 might
try to reference P [ m  + 1] after finding an occurrence of P . (The ar gument
that q  = σ ( T [: i  – 1]) upon the next execution of line 4 remains valid by the
hint given in Exercise 32.4-8: that δ ( m , a ) = δ ( π [ m ], a ) or , equivalently ,
σ ( Pa ) = σ ( P [: π [ m ]] a ) for any a  ∈  ∑.) The remaining ar gument for the
correctness of the Knuth-Morris-Pratt algorithm follows from the
correctness of F INITE -A UT OMA T ON -M A TCHER , since we have shown that
KMP-M A TCHER  simulates the behavior of F INITE -A UT OMA T ON -M A TCHER .
Exer cises
32.4-1
Compute the prefix function π  for the pattern ababbabbabbababbabb .
32.4-2
Give an upper bound on the size of π *[ q ] as a function of q . Give an
example to show that your bound is tight.
32.4-3
Explain how to determine the occurrences of pattern P  in the text T  by
examining the π  function for the string PT  (the string of length m + n  that is
the concatenation of P  and T ).
32.4-4
Page number: 1151
Use an aggregate analysis to show that the running time of KMP-M A TCHER
is Θ( n ).
32.4-5
Use a potential function to show that the running time of KMP-M A TCHER  is
Θ( n ).
32.4-6
Show how to improve KMP-M A TCHER  by replacing the occurrence of π  in
line 5 (but not line 10) by π ′, where π ′ is defined recursively for q  = 1, 2, …,
m  – 1 by the equation
Explain why the modified algorithm is correct, and explain in what sense
this change constitutes an improvement.
32.4-7
Give a linear -time algorithm to determine whether a text T  is a cyclic
rotation of another string T ′. For example, braze  and zebra  are cyclic
rotations of each other .
★  32.4-8
Give an O ( m  |∑|)-time algorithm for computing the transition function δ  for
the string-matching automaton corresponding to a given pattern P . ( Hint:
Prove that δ ( q , a ) = δ ( π [ q ], a ) if q  = m  or P [ q  + 1] ≠ a .)
32.5    Suffix arrays
The algorithms we have seen thus far in this chapter can ef ficiently find all
occurrences of a pattern in a text. That is, however , all they can do. This
section presents a dif ferent approach—suf fix arrays—with which you can
find all occurrences of a pattern in a text, but also quite a bit more. A suf fix
array won’ t find all occurrences of a pattern as quickly as, say , the Knuth-
Morris-Pratt algorithm, but its additional flexibility makes it well worth
studying.
Page number: 1152
Figur e 32.1 1  The suf fix array SA , rank array rank , longest common prefix array LCP , and
lexicographically sorted suf fixes of the text T  = ratatat  with length n  = 7. The value of rank [ i ]
indicates the position of the suf fix T [ i :] in the lexicographically sorted order: rank [ SA [ i ]] = i  for i  = 1,
2, …, n . The rank  array is used to compute the LCP  array .
A suf fix array is simply a compact way to represent the
lexicographically sorted order of all n  suf fixes of a length- n  text. Given a
text T [1: n ], let T [ i :] denote the suf fix T [ i : n ]. The suf fix array  SA [1: n ] of T  is
defined such that if SA [ i ] = j , then T [ j :] is the i th suf fix of T  in lexicographic
order .3 That is, the i th suf fix of T  in lexicographic order is T [ SA [ i ]:]. Along
with the suf fix array , another useful array is the longest common prefix
array  LCPOE [1: n ]. The entry LCP [ i ] gives the length of the longest
common prefix between the i th and ( i  – 1)st suf fixes in the sorted order
(with LCP [ SA [1]] defined to be 0, since there is no prefix lexicographically
smaller than T [ SA [1]:]). Figure 32.1 1  shows the suf fix array and longest
common prefix array for the 7-character text ratatat .
Given the suf fix array for a text, you can search for a pattern via binary
search on the suf fix array . Each occurrence of a pattern in the text starts
some suf fix of the text, and because the suf fix array is in lexicographically
sorted order , all occurrences of a pattern will appear at the start of
consecutive entries of the suf fix array . For example, in Figure 32.1 1 , the
three occurrences of at in ratatat  appear in entries 1 through 3 of the
suf fix array . If you find the length- m  pattern in the length- n  suf fix array via
binary search (taking O ( m  1g n ) time because each comparison takes O ( m )
time), then you can find all occurrences of the pattern in the text by
searching backward and forward from that spot until you find a suf fix that
does not start with the pattern (or you go beyond the bounds of the suf fix
array). If the pattern occurs k  times, then the time to find all k  occurrences is
O ( m  1g n  + km ).
W ith the longest common prefix array , you can find a longest repeated
substring, that is, the longest substring that occurs more than once in the
Page number: 1153
text. If LCP [ i ] contains a maximum value in the LCP  array , then a longest
repeated substring appears in T [ SA [ i ]: SA [ i ] + LCP [ i ] – 1]. In the example of
Figure 32.1 1 , the LCP  array has one maximum value: LCP [3] = 4.
Therefore, since SA [3] = 2, the longest repeated substring is T [2:5] = atat .
Exercise 32.5-3 asks you to use the suf fix array and longest common prefix
array to find the longest common substrings between two texts. Next, we’ll
see how to compute the suf fix array for an n -character text in O ( n  1g n )
time and, given the suf fix array and the text, how to compute the longest
common prefix array in Θ( n ) time.
Computing the suffix array
There are several algorithms to compute the suf fix array of a length- n  text.
Some run in linear time, but are rather complicated. One such algorithm is
given in Problem 32-2. Here we’ll explore a simpler algorithm that runs in
Θ( n  1g n ) time.
The idea behind the O ( n  1g n )-time procedure C OMPUTE -S UFFIX -A RRA Y
on the following page is to lexicographically sort substrings of the text with
increasing lengths. The procedure makes several passes over the text, with
the substring length doubling each time. By the ⌈ 1g n ⌉ th pass, the procedure
is sorting all the suf fixes, thereby gaining the information needed to
construct the suf fix array . The key to attaining an O ( n  1g n )-time algorithm
will be to have each pass after the first sort in linear time, which will indeed
be possible by using radix sort.
Let’ s start with a simple observation. Consider any two strings, s1  and
s2 . Decompose s1  into 
  and 
 , so that s1  is 
  concatenated with 
 .
Likewise, let s2  be 
  concatenated with 
 . Now , suppose that 
  is
lexicographically smaller than 
 . Then, regardless of 
  and 
 , it must be
the case that s1  is lexicographically smaller than s2 . For example, let s1  =
aaz  and s2  = aba , and decompose s1  into 
  and 
  and s2  into 
 and 
 . Because 
  is lexicographically smaller than 
 , it
follows that s1  is lexicographically smaller than s2 , even though 
  is
lexicographically smaller than 
 .
Instead of comparing substrings directly , C OMPUTE -S UFFIX -A RRA Y
represents substrings of the text with integer ranks . Ranks have the simple
property that one substring is lexicographically smaller then another if and
only if it has a smaller rank. Identical substrings have equal ranks.
Page number: 1154
Where do these ranks come from? Initially , the substrings being
considered are just single characters from the text. Assume that, as in many
programming languages, there is a function, ord, that maps a character to its
underlying encoding, which is a positive integer . The ord function could be
the ASCII or Unicode encodings or any other function that produces a
relative ordering of the characters. For example if all the characters are
known to be lowercase letters, then ord( a ) = 1, ord(b ) = 2, …, ord( z ) = 26
would work. Once the substrings being considered contain multiple
characters, their ranks will be positive integers less than or equal to n ,
coming from their relative order after being sorted. An empty substring
always has rank 0, since it is lexicographically less than any nonempty
substring.
C OMPUTE -S UFFIX -A RRA Y ( T , n )
  1 allocate arrays substr -rank [1: n ], rank [1: n ], and SA [1: n ]
  2 for  i  = 1 to  n
  3 substr -rank [ i ]. left-rank  = ord( T [ i ])
  4 if  i  < n
  5 substr -rank [ i ]. right-rank  = ord( T [ i  + 1])
  6 else  substr -rank [ i ]. right-rank  = 0
  7 substr -rank [ i ]. index  = i
  8 sort the array substr -rank  into monotonically increasing order based on the left-rank
attributes, using the right-rank  attributes to break ties; if still a tie, the order does not
matter
  9 l  = 2
10 while  l  < n
1 1 M AKE -R ANKS ( substr -rank , rank , n )
12 for  i  = 1 to  n
13 substr -rank [ i ]. left-rank  = rank [ i ]
14 if  i  + l  ≤ n
15 substr -rank [ i ]. right-rank  = rank [ i  + l ]
16 else  substr -rank [ i ]. right-rank  = 0
17 substr -rank [ i ]. index  = i
18 sort the array substr -rank  into monotonically increasing order based on the left-rank
attributes, using the right-rank  attributes to break ties; if still a tie, the order does
not matter
19 l  = 2 l
20 for  i  = 1 to  n
21 SA [ i ] = substr -rank [ i ]. index
22 r eturn  SA
M AKE -R ANKS ( substr -rank , rank , n )
  1 r  = 1
  2 rank [ substr -rank [1]. index ] = r
  3 for  i  = 2 to  n
Page number: 1155
  4 if  substr -rank [ i ]. left-rank  ≠ substr -rank [ i  – 1]. left-rank
  or substr -rank [ i ]. right-rank  ≠ substr -rank [ i  – 1]. right-rank
  5 r  = r  + 1
  6 rank [ substr -rank [ i ]. index ] = r
Figur e 32.12  The substr -rank  array for indices i  = 1, 2, …, 7 after the for  loop of lines 2–7 and after
the sorting step in line 8 for input string T  = ratatat .
The C OMPUTE -S UFFIX -A RRA Y  procedure uses objects internally to keep
track of the relative ordering of the substrings according to their ranks.
When considering substrings of a given length, the procedure creates and
sorts an array substr -rank [1: n ] of n  objects, each with the following
attributes:
left-rank  contains the rank of the left part of the substring.
right-rank  contains the rank of the right part of the substring.
index  contains the index into the text T  of where the substring starts.
Before delving into the details of how the procedure works, let’ s look at
how it operates on the input text ratatat , with n  = 7. Assuming that the
ord function returns the ASCII code for a character , Figure 32.12  shows the
substr -rank  array after the for  loop of lines 2–7 and then after the sorting
step in line 8. The left-rank  and right-rank  values after lines 2–7 are the
ranks of length-1 substrings in positions i  and i  + 1, for i  = 1, 2, …, n . These
initial ranks are the ASCII values of the characters. At this point, the left-
rank  and right-rank  values give the ranks of the left and right part of each
substring of length 2. Because the substring starting at index 7 consists of
only one character , its right part is empty and so its right-rank  is 0. After
the sorting step in line 8, the substr -rank  array gives the relative
lexicographic order of all the substrings of length 2, with starting points of
these substrings in the index  attribute. For example, the lexicographically
Page number: 1156
smallest length-2 substring is at , which starts at position substr -
rank [1]. index , which equals 2. This substring also occurs at positions
substr -rank [2]. index  = 4 and substr -rank [3]. index  = 6.
The procedure then enters the while  loop of lines 10–19. The loop
variable l  gives an upper bound on the length of substrings that have been
sorted thus far . Entering the while  loop, therefore, the substrings of length
at most l  = 2 are sorted. The call of M AKE -R ANKS  in line 1 1 gives each of
these substrings its rank in the sorted order , from 1 up to the number of
unique length-2 substrings, based on the values it finds in the substr -rank
array . W ith l  = 2, M AKE -R ANKS  sets rank [ i ] to be the rank of the length-2
substring T [ i : i  + 1]. Figure 32.13  shows these new ranks, which are not
necessarily unique. For example, since the length-2 substring at  occurs at
positions 2, 4, and 6, M AKE -R ANKS  finds that substr -rank [1], substr -
rank [2], and substr -rank [3] have equal values in left-rank  and in right-rank .
Since substr -rank [1]. index  = 2, substr -rank [2]. index  = 4, and substr -
rank [3]. index  = 6, and since at  is the smallest substring in lexicographic
order , M AKE -R ANKS  sets rank [2] = rank [4] = rank [6] = 1.
Figur e 32.13  The rank  array after line 1 1 and the substr -rank  array after lines 12–17 and after line 18
in the first iteration of the while  loop of lines 10–19, where l  = 2.
This iteration of the while  loop will sort the substrings of length at most
4 based on the ranks from sorting the substrings of length at most 2. The for
loop of lines 12–17 reconstitutes the substr -rank  array , with substr -
rank [ i ]. left-rank  based on rank [ i ] (the rank of the length-2 substring
T [ i : i +1]) and substr -rank [ i ]. right-rank  based on rank [ i  + 2] (the rank of the
length-2 substring T [ i  + 2: i  + 3], which is 0 if this substring starts beyond
the end of the length- n  text). T ogether , these two ranks give the relative
rank of the length-4 substring T [ i : i  + 3]. Figure 32.13  shows the ef fect of
lines 12–17. The figure also shows the result of sorting the substr -rank
array in line 18, based on the left-rank  attribute, and using the right-rank
Page number: 1157
attribute to break ties. Now substr -rank  gives the lexicographically sorted
order of all substrings with length at most 4.
The next iteration of the while  loop, with l  = 4, sorts the substrings of
length at most 8 based on the ranks from sorting the substrings of length at
most4 4. Figure 32.14  shows the ranks of the length-4 substrings and the
substr -rank  array before and after sorting. This iteration is the final one,
since with the length n  of the text equaling 7, the procedure has sorted all
substrings.
Figur e 32.14  The rank  array after line 1 1 and the substr -rank  array after lines 12–17 and after line 18
in the second—and final—iteration of the while  loop of lines 10–19, where l  = 4.
In general, as the loop variable l  increases, more and more of the right
parts of the substrings are empty . Therefore, more of the right-rank  values
are 0. Because i  is at most n  within the loop of lines 12–17, the left part of
each substring is always nonempty , and so all left-rank  values are always
positive.
This example illuminates why the C OMPUTE -S UFFIX -A RRA Y  procedure
works. The initial ranks established in lines 2–7 are simply the ord values of
the characters in the text, and so when line 8 sorts the substr -rank  array , its
ordering corresponds to the lexicographic ordering of the length-2
substrings. Each iteration of the while  loop of lines 10–19 takes sorted
substrings of length l  and produces sorted substrings of length 2 l . Once l
reaches or exceeds n , all substrings have been sorted.
W ithin an iteration of the while  loop, the M AKE -R ANKS  procedure “re-
ranks” the substrings that were sorted, either by line 8 before the first
iteration or by line 18 in the previous iteration. M AKE -R ANKS  takes a substr -
rank  array , which has been sorted, and fills in an array rank [1: n ] so that
rank [ i ] is the rank of the i th substring represented in the substr -rank  array .
Each rank is a positive integer , starting from 1, and going up to the number
of unique substrings of length 2 l . Substrings with equal values of left-rank
Page number: 1158
and right-rank  receive the same rank. Otherwise, a substring that is
lexicographically smaller than another appears earlier in the substr -rank
array , and it receives a smaller rank. Once the substrings of length 2 l  are re-
ranked, line 18 sorts them by rank, preparing for the next iteration of the
while  loop.
Once l  reaches or exceeds n  and all substrings are sorted, the values in
the index  attributes give the starting positions of the sorted substrings.
These indices are precisely the values that constitute the suf fix array .
Let’ s analyze the running time of C OMPUTE -S UFFIX -A RRA Y . Lines 1–7
take Θ( n ) time. Line 8 takes O ( n  1g n ) time, using either mer ge sort (see
Section 2.3.1 ) or heapsort (see Chapter 6 ). Because the value of l  doubles in
each iteration of the while  loop of lines 10–19, this loop makes ⌈ 1g n ⌉  – 1
iterations. W ithin each iteration, the call of M AKE -R ANKS  takes Θ( n ) time,
as does the for  loop of lines 12–17. Line 18, like line 8, takes O ( n  1g n )
time, using either mer ge sort or heapsort. Finally , the for  loop of lines 20–
21 takes Θ( n ) time. The total time works out to O ( n  1g2 n ).
A simple observation allows us to reduce the running time to Θ( n  1g n ).
The values of left-rank  and right-rank  being sorted in line 18 are always
integers in the range 0 to n . Therefore, radix sort can sort the substr -rank
array in Θ( n ) time by first running counting sort (see Chapter 8 ) based on
right-rank  and then running counting sort based on left-rank . Now each
iteration of the while  loop of lines 10–19 takes only Θ( n ) time, giving a
total time of Θ( n  1g n ).
Exercise 32.5-2 asks you to make a simple modification to C OMPUTE -
S UFFIX -A RRA Y  that allows the while  loop of lines 10–19 to iterate fewer
than ⌈ 1g n ⌉  – 1 times for certain inputs.
Computing the LCP  array
Recall that LCP [ i ] is defined as the length of the longest common prefix of
the ( i  – 1)st and i th lexicographically smallest suf fixes T [ SA [ i  – 1]:] and
T [ SA [ i ]:]. Because T [ SA [1]:] is the lexicographically smallest suf fix, we
define LCP [1] to be 0.
In order to compute the LCP  array , we need an array rank  that is the
inverse of the SA  array , just like the final rank  array in C OMPUTE -S UFFIX -
A RRA Y : if SA [ i ] = j , then rank [ j ] = i . That is, we have rank [ SA [ i ]] = i  for i  =
1, 2, …, n . For a suf fix T [ i :], the value of rank [ i ] gives the position of this
suf fix in the lexicographically sorted order . Figure 32.1 1  includes the rank
Page number: 1159
array for the ratatat  example. For example, the suf fix tat  is T [5:]. T o
find this suf fix’ s position in the sorted order , look up rank [5] = 6.
T o compute the LCP  array , we will need to determine where in the
lexicographically sorted order a suf fix appears, but with its first character
removed. The rank  array helps. Consider the i th smallest suf fix, which is
T [ SA [ i ]:]. Dropping its first character gives the suf fix T [ SA [ i ] + 1:], that is,
the suf fix starting at position SA [ i ] + 1 in the text. The location of this suf fix
in the sorted order is given by rank [ SA [ i ] + 1]. For example, for the suf fix
atat , let’ s see where to find tat  (atat  with its first character removed)
in the lexicographically sorted order . The suf fix atat  appears in position 2
of the suf fix array , and SA [2] = 4. Thus, rank [ SA [2] + 1] = rank [5] = 6, and
sure enough the suf fix tat  appears in location 6 in the sorted order .
The procedure C OMPUTE -LCP on the next page produces the LCP  array .
The following lemma helps show that the procedure is correct.
C OMPUTE -LCP( T , SA , n )
  1 allocate arrays rank [1: n ] and LCP [1: n ]
  2 for  i  = 1 to  n
  3 rank [ SA [ i ]] = i //  by definition
  4 LCP [1] = 0 //  also by definition
  5 l  = 0 //  initialize length of LCP
  6 for  i  = 1 to  n
  7 if  rank [ i ] > 1
  8 j  = SA [ rank [ i ] – 1] //  T [ j :] precedes T [ i :] lexicographically
  9 m  = max { i , j  }
10 while  m  + l  ≤ n  and T [ i  + l ] == T [ j  + l ]
1 1 l  = l  + 1 //  next character is in common prefix
12 LCP [ rank [ i ]] = l //  length of LCP of T [ j :] and T [ i :]
13 if  l  > 0
14 l  = l  – 1 //  peel of f first character of common prefix
15 r eturn  LCP
Lemma 32.8
Consider suf fixes T [ i  – 1:] and T [ i :], which appear at positions rank [ i  – 1]
and rank [ i ], respectively , in the lexicographically sorted order of suf fixes. If
LCP [ rank [ i  – 1]] = l  > 1, then the suf fix T [ i :], which is T [ i  – 1:] with its first
character removed, has LCP [ rank [ i ]] ≥ l  – 1.
Proof    The suf fix T [ i  – 1:] appears at position rank [ i  – 1] in the
lexicographically sorted order . The suf fix immediately preceding it in the
sorted order appears at position rank [ i  – 1] – 1 and is T [ SA [ rank [ i  – 1] –
Page number: 1160
1]:]. By assumption and the definition of the LCP  array , these two suf fixes,
T [ SA [ rank [ i –1]–1]:] and T [ i –1:], have a longest common prefix of length l
> 1. Removing the first character from each of these suf fixes gives the
suf fixes T [ SA [ rank [ i  – 1] – 1] + 1:] and T [ i :], respectively . These suf fixes
have a longest common prefix of length l  – 1. If T [ SA [ rank [ i  – 1] – 1] + 1:]
immediately precedes T [ i :] in the lexicographically sorted order (that is, if
rank [ SA [ rank [ i  – 1] – 1] + 1] = rank [ i ] – 1), then the lemma is proven.
So now assume that T [ SA [ rank [ i  – 1] – 1] + 1:] does not immediately
precede T [ i :] in the sorted order . Since T [ SA [ rank [ i  – 1] – 1]:] immediately
precedes T [ i –1:] and they have the same first l  > 1 characters, T [ SA [ rank [ i  –
1] – 1] + 1:] must appear in the sorted order somewhere before T [ i :], with
one or more other suf fixes intervening. Each of these suf fixes must start
with the same l  – 1 characters as T [ SA [ rank [ i  – 1] – 1] + 1:] and T [ i :], for
otherwise it would appear either before T [ SA [ rank [ i  – 1] – 1] + 1:] or after
T [ i :]. Therefore, whichever suf fix appears in position rank [ i ] – 1,
immediately before T [ i :], has at least its first l  – 1 characters in common
with T [ i :]. Thus, LCP [ rank [ i ]] ≥ l  – 1.
▪
The C OMPUTE -LCP procedure works as follows. After allocating the
rank  and LCP  arrays in line 1, lines 2–3 fill in the rank  array and line 4
pegs LCP [1] to 0, per the definition of the LCP  array .
The for  loop of lines 6–14 fills in the rest of the LCP  array going by
decreasing-length suf fixes. That is, it fills the position of the LCP  array in
the order rank [1], rank [2], rank [3], …, rank [ n ], with the assignment
occurring in line 12. Upon considering a suf fix T [ i :], line 8 determines the
suf fix T [ j :] that immediately precedes T [ i :] in the lexicographically sorted
order . At this point, the longest common prefix of T [ j :] and T [ i :] has length
at least l . This property certainly holds upon the first iteration of the for
loop, when l  = 0. Assuming that line 12 sets LCP [ rank [ i ]] correctly , line 14
(which decrements l  if it is positive) and Lemma 32.8 maintain this property
for the next iteration. The longest common prefix of T [ j :] and T [ i :] might be
even longer than the value of l  at the start of the iteration, however . Lines
9–1 1 increment l  for each additional character the prefixes have in common
so that it achieves the length of the longest common prefix. The index m  is
set in line 9 and used in the test in line 10 to make sure that the test T [ i  + l ]
== T [ j  + l ] for extending the longest common prefix does not run of f the
Page number: 1161
end of the text T . When the while  loop of lines 10–1 1 terminates, l  is the
length of the longest common prefix of T [ j :] and T [ i :].
As a simple aggregate analysis shows, the C OMPUTE -LCP procedure runs
in Θ( n ) time. Each of the two for  loops iterates n  times, and so it remains
only to bound the total number of iterations by the while  loop of lines 10–
1 1. Each iteration increases l  by 1, and the test m  + l  ≤ n  ensures that l  is
always less than n . Because l  has an initial value of 0 and decreases at most
n  – 1 times in line 14, line 1 1 increments l  fewer than 2 n  times. Thus,
C OMPUTE -LCP takes Θ( n ) time.
Exer cises
32.5-1
Show the substr -rank  and rank  arrays before each iteration of the while
loop of lines 10–19 and after the last iteration of the while  loop, the suf fix
array SA  returned, and the sorted suf fixes when C OMPUTE -S UFFIX -A RRA Y  is
run on the text hippityhoppity . Use the position of each letter in the
alphabet as its ord value, so that ord( b ) = 2. Then show the LCP  array after
each iteration of the for  loop of lines 6–14 of C OMPUTE -LCP given the text
hippityhoppity  and its suf fix array .
32.5-2
For some inputs, the C OMPUTE -S UFFIX -A RRA Y  procedure can produce the
correct result with fewer than ⌈ 1g n ⌉  – 1 iterations of the while  loop of lines
10–19. Modify C OMPUTE -S UFFIX -A RRA Y  (and, if necessary , M AKE -R ANKS )
so that the procedure can stop before making all ⌈ 1g n ⌉  – 1 iterations in
some cases. Describe an input that allows the procedure to make O (1)
iterations. Describe an input that forces the procedure to make the
maximum number of iterations.
32.5-3
Given two texts, T1  of length n1  and T2  of length n2 , show how to use the
suf fix array and longest common prefix array to find all of the longest
common substrings , that is, the longest substrings that appear in both T1
and T2 . Y our algorithm should run in O ( n  1g n  + kl ) time, where n  = n1  + n2
and there are k  such longest substrings, each with length l .
32.5-4
Page number: 1162
Professor Markram proposes the following method to find the longest
palindromes in a string T [1: n ] by using its suf fix array and LCP array .
(Recall from Problem 14-2 that a palindrome is a nonempty string that
reads the same forward and backward.)
Let @  be a character that does not appear in T . Construct the text T ′
as the concatenation of T , @ , and the reverse of T . Denote the
length of T ′ by n ′ = 2 n  + 1. Create the suf fix array SA  and LCP
array LCP  for T ′. Since the indices for a palindrome and its reverse
appear in consecutive positions in the suf fix array , find the entries
with the maximum LCP  value LCP [ i ] such that SA [ i  – 1] = n ′ –
SA [ i ] – LCP [ i ] + 2. (This constraint prevents a substring—and its
reverse—from being construed as a palindrome unless it really is
one.) For each such index i , one of the longest palindromes is T ′
[ SA [ i ]: SA [ i ] + LCP [ i ] – 1].
For example, if the text T  is unreferenced , with n  = 12, then the text
T ′ is unreferenced@decnerefernu , with n ′ = 25 and the following
suf fix array and LCP array:
The maximum LCP  value is achieved at LCP [21] = 5, and SA [20] = 3 = n ′ –
SA [21] – LCP [21] + 2. The suf fixes of T ′ starting at indices SA [20] and
SA [21] are referenced@decnerefernu  and refernu , both of which
start with the length-5 palindrome refer .
Alas, this method is not foolproof. Give an input string T  that causes this
method to give results that are shorter than the longest palindrome
contained within T , and explain why your input causes the method to fail.
Pr oblems
32-1     String matching based on repetition factors
Let yi denote the concatenation of string y  with itself i  times. For example,
(ab )3 = ababab . W e say that a string x  ∈  ∑* has repetition factor  r  if x  =
Page number: 1163
yr for some string y  ∈  ∑* and some r  > 0. Let ρ ( x ) denote the lar gest r  such
that x  has repetition factor r .
a.  Give an ef ficient algorithm that takes as input a pattern P [1: m ] and
computes the value ρ ( P [: i ]) for i  = 1, 2, …, m . What is the running time of
your algorithm?
b.  For any pattern P [1: m ], let ρ *( P ) be defined as max { ρ ( P [: i ]) : 1 ≤ i  ≤ m }.
Prove that if the pattern P  is chosen randomly from the set of all binary
strings of length m , then the expected value of ρ *( P ) is O (1).
c.  Ar gue that the procedure R EPETITION -M A TCHER  correctly finds all
occurrences of pattern P [1: m ] in text T [1: n ] in O ( ρ *( P ) n  + m ) time. (This
algorithm is due to Galil and Seiferas. By extending these ideas greatly ,
they obtained a linear -time string-matching algorithm that uses only O (1)
storage beyond what is required for P  and T .)
R EPETITION -M A TCHER ( T , P , n , m )
  1 k  = 1 + ρ *( P )
  2 q  = 0
  3 s  = 0
  4 while  s  ≤ n  – m
  5 if  T [ s  + q  + 1] == P [ q  + 1]
  6 q  = q  + 1
  7 if  q  == m
  8 print “Pattern occurs with shift” s
  9 if  q  == m  or T [ s  + q  + 1] ≠ P [ q  + 1]
10 s  = s  + max {1, ⌈ q / k ⌉ }
1 1 q  = 0
32-2     A linear-time suf fix-array algorithm
In this problem, you will develop and analyze a linear -time divide-and-
conquer algorithm to compute the suf fix array of a text T [1: n ]. As in
Section 32.5 , assume that each character in the text is represented by an
underlying encoding, which is a positive integer .
The idea behind the linear -time algorithm is to compute the suf fix array
for the suf fixes starting at 2/3 of the positions in the text, recursing as
needed, use the resulting information to sort the suf fixes starting at the
remaining 1/3 of the positions, and then mer ge the sorted information in
linear time to produce the full suf fix array .
Page number: 1164
For i  = 1, 2, …, n , if i  mod 3 equals 1 or 2, then i  is a sample position ,
and the suf fixes starting at such positions are sample suf fixes . Positions 3,
6, 9, … are nonsample positions , and the suf fixes starting at nonsample
positions are nonsample suf fixes .
The algorithm sorts the sample suf fixes, sorts the nonsample suf fixes
(aided by the result of sorting the sample suf fixes), and mer ges the sorted
sample and nonsample suf fixes. Using the example text T  =
bippityboppityboo , here is the algorithm in detail, listing substeps of
each of the above steps:
1. The sample suf fixes comprise about 2/3 of the suf fixes. Sort them by the
following substeps, which work with a heavily modified version of T  and
may require recursion. In part (a) of this problem on page 999, you will
show that the orders of the suf fixes of T  and the suf fixes of the modified
version of T  are the same.
A. Construct two texts P1  and P2  made up of “metacharacters” that are
actually substrings of three consecutive characters from T . W e delimit
each such metacharacter with parentheses. Construct
P1  = ( T [1:3])( T [4:6])( T [7:9]) ⋯  ( T [ n ′: n ′ + 2]),
where n ′ is the lar gest integer congruent to 1, modulo 3, that is less
than or equal to n  and T  is extended beyond position n  with the special
character Ø, with encoding 0. W ith the example text T  =
bippityboppityboo , we get that
P1  = (bip ) (pit ) (ybo ) (ppi ) (tyb ) (ooØ ).
Similarly , construct
P2  = ( T [2:4])( T [5:7])( T [8:10]) ⋯  ( T [ n ″: n ″ + 2]),
where n ″ is the lar gest integer congruent to 2, modulo 3, that is less
than or equal to n . For our example, we have
P2  = (ipp ) (ity ) (bop ) (pit ) (ybo ) (oØØ ).
Page number: 1165
Figur e 32.15  Computed values when sorting the sample suf fixes of the linear -time suf fix-array
algorithm for the text T  = bippityboppityboo .
If n  is a multiple of 3, append the metacharacter (ØØØ) to the end of
P1 . In this way , P1  is guaranteed to end with a metacharacter
containing Ø. (This property helps in part (a) of this problem.) The text
P2  may or may not end with a metacharacter containing Ø.
B. Concatenate P1  and P2  to form a new text P . Figure 32.15  shows P  for
our example, along with the corresponding positions of T .
C. Sort and rank the unique metacharacters of P , with ranks starting from
1. In the example, P  has 10 unique metacharacters: in sorted order , they
are (bip ), (bop ), (ipp ), (ity ), (oØØ ), (ooØ ), (pit ), (ppi ), (tyb ),
(ybo ). The metacharacters ( pit ) and (ybo ) each appear twice.
D. As Figure 32.15  shows, construct a new “text” P ′ by renaming each
metacharacter in P  by its rank. If P  contains k  unique metacharacters,
then each “character” in P ′ is an integer from 1 to k . The suf fix arrays
for P  and P ′ are identical.
E. Compute the suf fix array SAP ′  of P ′. If the characters of P ′ (i.e., the
ranks of metacharacters in P ) are unique, then you can compute its
suf fix array directly , since the ordering of the individual characters
gives the suf fix array . Otherwise, recurse to compute the suf fix array of
P ′, treating the ranks in P ′ as the input characters in the recursive call.
Figure 32.15  shows the suf fix array SAP ′  for our example. Since the
number of metacharacters in P , and hence the length of P ′, is
approximately 2 n /3, this recursive subproblem is smaller than the
current problem.
Page number: 1166
F . From SAP ′  and the positions in T  corresponding to the sample positions,
compute the list of positions of the sorted sample suf fixes of the
original text T . Figure 32.15  shows the list of positions in T  of the
sorted sample suf fixes in our example.
2. The nonsample suf fixes comprise about 1/3 of the suf fixes. Using the
sorted sample suf fixes, sort the nonsample suf fixes by the following
substeps.
Figur e 32.16  The ranks r 1  through r n +3  for the text T  = bippityboppityboo  with n  = 17.
G. Extending the text T  by the two special characters ØØ, so that T  now
has n  + 2 characters, consider each suf fix T [ i :] for i  = 1, 2, …, n  + 2.
Assign a rank ri  to each suf fix T [ i :]. For the two special characters ØØ,
set rn +1  = rn +2  = 0. For the sample positions of T , base the rank on the
list of sorted sample positions of T . The rank is currently undefined for
the nonsample positions of T . For these positions, set ri  = ☐ . Figure
32.16  shows the ranks for T  = bippityboppityboo  with n  = 17.
H. Sort the nonsample suf fixes by comparing tuples ( T [ i ], ri +1 ). In our
example, we get T [15:] < T [12:] < T [9:] < T [3:] < T [6:] because ( b , 6)
< (i , 10) < (o , 9) < (p , 8) < (t , 12).
3. Mer ge the sorted sets of suf fixes. From the sorted set of suf fixes,
determine the suf fix array of T .
This completes the description of a linear -time algorithm for computing
suf fix arrays. The following parts of this problem ask you to show that
certain steps of this algorithm are correct and to analyze the algorithm’ s
running time.
a.  Define a nonempty suf fix  at position i  of the text P  created in substep B
as all metacharacters from position i  of P  up to and including the first
metacharacter of P  in which Ø appears or the end of P . In the example
shown in Figure 32.15 , the nonempty suf fixes of P  starting at positions 1,
Page number: 1167
4, and 1 1 of P  are (bip ) (pit ) (ybo ) (ppi ) (tyb ) (ooØ ), (ppi ) (tyb )
(ooØ ), and (ybo ) (oØØ ), respectively . Prove that the order of suf fixes of
P  is the same as the order of its nonempty suf fixes. Conclude that the
order of suf fixes of P  gives the order of the sample suf fixes of T . ( Hint:  If
P  contains duplicate metacharacters, consider separately the cases in
which two suf fixes both start in P1 , both start in P2 , and one starts in P1
and the other starts in P2 . Use the property that Ø appears in the last
metacharacter of P1 .)
b.  Show how to perform substep C in Θ( n ) time, bearing in mind that in a
recursive call, the characters in T  are actually ranks in P ′ in the caller .
c.  Ar gue that the tuples in substep H are unique. Then show how to perform
this substep in Θ( n ) time.
d.  Consider two suf fixes T [ i :] and T [ j :], where T [ i :] is a sample suf fix and
T [ j :] is a nonsample suf fix. Show how to determine in Θ(1) time whether
T [ i :] is lexicographically smaller than T [ j :]. ( Hint:  Consider separately the
cases in which i  mod 3 = 1 and i  mod 3 = 2. Compare tuples whose
elements are characters in T  and ranks as shown in Figure 32.16 . The
number of elements per tuple may depend on whether i  mod 3 equals 1 or
2.) Conclude that step 3 can be performed in Θ( n ) time.
e.  Justify the recurrence T ( n ) ≤ T  (2 n /3 + 2) + Θ( n ) for the running time of
the full algorithm, and show that its solution is O ( n ). Conclude that the
algorithm runs in Θ( n ) time.
32-3     Burrows-Wheeler transform
The Burrows-Wheeler transform , or BWT , for a text T  is defined as
follows. First, append a new character that compares as lexicographically
less than every character of T , and denote this character by $  and the
resulting string by T ′. Letting n  be the length of T ′, create n  rows of
characters, where each row is one of the n  cyclic rotations of T ′. Next, sort
the rows lexicographically . The BWT is then the string of n  characters in
the rightmost column, read top to bottom.
For example, let T  = rutabaga , so that T ′ = rutabaga$ . The cyclic
rotations are
rutabaga$
Page number: 1168
utabaga$r
tabaga$ru
abaga$rut
baga$ruta
aga$rutab
ga$rutaba
a$rutabag
$rutabaga
Sorting the rows and numbering the sorted rows gives
1$rutabaga
2a$rutabag
3abaga$rut
4aga$rutab
5baga$ruta
6ga$rutaba
7rutabaga$
8tabaga$ru
9utabaga$r
The BWT is the rightmost column, agtbaa$ur . (The row numbering will
be helpful in understanding how to compute the inverse BWT .)
The BWT has applications in bioinformatics, and it can also be a step in
text compression. That is because it tends to place identical characters
together , as in the BWT of rutabaga , which places two of the instances
of a  together . When identical characters are placed together , or even nearby ,
additional means of compressing become available. Following the BWT ,
combinations of move-to-front encoding, run-length encoding, and
Huf fman coding (see Section 15.3 ) can provide significant text
compression. Compression ratios with the BWT tend improve as the text
length increases.
a.  Given the suf fix array for T ′, show how to compute the BWT in Θ( n )
time.
In order to decompress, the BWT must be invertible. Assuming that the
alphabet size is constant, the inverse BWT can be computed in Θ( n ) time
from the BWT . Let’ s look at the BWT of rutabaga , denoting it by
BWT [1: n ]. Each character in the BWT has a unique lexicographic rank from
1 to n . Denote the rank of BWT [ i ] by rank [ i ]. If a character appears multiple
Page number: 1169
times in the BWT , each instance of the character has a rank 1 greater than
the previous instance of the character . Here are BWT  and rank  for
rutabaga :
For example, rank [1] = 2 because BWT [1] = a  and the only character that
precedes the first a lexicographically is $  (which we defined to precede all
other characters, so that $  has rank 1). Next, we have rank [2] = 6 because
BWT [2] = g  and five characters in the BWT precede g  lexicographically: $ ,
the three instances of a , and b . Jumping ahead to rank [5] = 3, that is
because BWT [5] = a , and because this a  is the second instance of a  in the
BWT , its rank  value is 1 greater than the rank  value for the previous
instance of a , in position 1.
There is enough information in BWT  and rank  to reconstruct T ′ from
back to front. Suppose that you know the rank r  of a character c  in T ′. Then
c  is the first character in row r  of the sorted cyclic rotations. The last
character in row r  must be the character that precedes c  in T ′. But you know
which character is the last character in row r , because it is BWT [ r ]. T o
reconstruct T ′ from back to front, start with $ , which you can find in BWT .
Then work backward using BWT  and rank  to reconstruct T ′.
Let’ s see how this strategy works for rutabaga . The last character of
T ′, $ , appears in position 7 of BWT . Since rank [7] = 1, row 1 of the sorted
cyclic rotations of T ′ begins with $ . The character that precedes $  in T ′ is
the last character in row 1, which is BWT [1]: a . Now we know that the last
two characters of T ′ are a$ . Looking up rank [1], it equals 2, so that row 2
of the sorted cyclic rotations of T ′ begins with a . The last character in row 2
precedes a in T ′, and that character is BWT [2] = g . Now we know that the
last three characters of T ′ are ga$ . Continuing on, we have rank [2] = 6, so
that row 6 of the sorted cyclic rotations begins with g . The character
preceding g  in T ′ is BWT [6] = a , and so the last four characters of T ′ are
aga$ . Because rank [6] = 4, a  begins row 4 of the sorted cyclic rotations of
T ′. The character preceding a  in T ′ is the last character in row 4, BWT [4] =
b , and the last five characters of T ′ are baga$ . And so on, until all n
characters of T ′ have been identified, from back to front.
Page number: 1170
b.  Given the array BWT [1: n ], write pseudcode to compute the array
rank [1: n ] in Θ( n ) time, assuming that the alphabet size is constant.
c.  Given the arrays BWT [1: n ] and rank [1: n ], write pseudocode to compute
T ′ in Θ( n ) time.
Chapter notes
The relation of string matching to the theory of finite automata is discussed
by Aho, Hopcroft, and Ullman [ 5 ]. The Knuth-Morris-Pratt algorithm [ 267 ]
was invented independently by Knuth and Pratt and by Morris, but they
published their work jointly . Matiyasevich [ 317 ] earlier discovered a similar
algorithm, which applied only to an alphabet with two characters and was
specified for a T uring machine with a two-dimensional tape. Reingold,
Urban, and Gries [ 377 ] give an alternative treatment of the Knuth-Morris-
Pratt algorithm. The Rabin-Karp algorithm was proposed by Karp and
Rabin [ 250 ]. Galil and Seiferas [ 173 ] give an interesting deterministic
linear -time string-matching algorithm that uses only O (1) space beyond that
required to store the pattern and text.
The suf fix-array algorithm in Section 32.5  is by Manber and Myers
[ 312 ], who first proposed the notion of suf fix arrays. The linear -time
algorithm to compute the longest common prefix array presented here is by
Kasai et al. [ 252 ]. Problem 32-2 is based on the DC3 algorithm by
Kärkkäinen, Sanders, and Burkhardt [ 245 ]. For a survey of suf fix-array
algorithms, see the article by Puglisi, Smyth, and T urpin [ 370 ]. T o learn
more about the Burrows-Wheeler transform from Problem 32-3, see the
articles by Burrows and Wheeler [ 78 ] and Manzini [ 314 ].
1 For suf fix arrays, the preprocessing time of O ( n  1g n ) comes from the algorithm presented in
Section 32.5 . It can be reduced to Θ( n ) by using the algorithm in Problem 32-2. The factor k  in the
matching time denotes the number of occurrences of the pattern in the text.
2 W e write Θ( n  – m  + 1) instead of Θ( n  – m ) because s  takes on n  − m  + 1 dif ferent values. The “+1”
is significant in an asymptotic sense because when m  = n , computing the lone t s  value takes Θ(1)
time, not Θ(0) time.
3 Informally , lexicographic order is “alphabetical order” in the underlying character set. A more
precise definition of lexicographic order appears in Problem 12-2 on page 327.
Page number: 1171
4 Why keep saying “length at most”? Because for a given value of l , a substring of length l  starting at
position i  is T [ i : i  + l  – 1]. If i  + l  − 1 > n , then the substring cuts of f at the end of the text.
Page number: 1172
33        Machine-Learning Algorithms
Machine learning may be viewed as a subfield of artificial intelligence.
Broadly speaking, artificial intelligence aims to enable computers to carry
out complex perception and information-processing tasks with human-like
performance. The field of AI is vast and uses many dif ferent algorithmic
methods.
Machine learning is rich and fascinating, with strong ties to statistics and
optimization. T echnology today produces enormous amounts of data,
providing myriad opportunities for machine-learning algorithms to
formulate and test hypotheses about patterns within the data. These
hypotheses can then be used to make predictions about the characteristics or
classifications in new data. Because machine learning is particularly good
with challenging tasks involving uncertainty , where observed data follows
unknown rules, it has markedly transformed fields such as medicine,
advertising, and speech recognition.
This chapter presents three important machine-learning algorithms: k -
means clustering, multiplicative weights, and gradient descent. Y ou can
view each of these tasks as a learning problem, whereby an algorithm uses
the data collected so far to produce a hypothesis that describes the
regularities learned and/or makes predictions about new data. The
boundaries of machine learning are imprecise and evolving—some might
say that the k -means clustering algorithm should be called “data science”
and not “machine learning,” and gradient descent, though an immensely
important algorithm for machine learning, also has a multitude of
applications outside of machine learning (most notably for optimization
problems).
Page number: 1173
Machine learning typically starts with a training phase  followed by a
prediction phase  in which predictions are made about new data. For online
learning , the training and prediction phases are intermingled. The training
phase takes as input training data , where each input data point has an
associated output or label ; the label might be a category name or some real-
valued attribute. It then produces as an output one or more hypotheses
about how the labels depend on the attributes of the input data points.
Hypotheses can take many forms, typically some type of formula or
algorithm. The learning algorithm used is often a form of gradient descent.
The prediction phase then uses the hypothesis on new data in order to make
predictions  regarding the labels of new data points.
The type of learning just described is known as supervised learning ,
since it starts with a set of inputs that are each labeled. As an example,
consider a machine-learning algorithm to recognize spam emails. The
training data comprises a collection of emails, each of which is labeled
either “spam” or “not spam.” The machine-learning algorithm frames a
hypothesis, possibly a rule of the form “if an email has one of a set of
words, then it is likely to be spam.” Or it might learn rules that assign a
spam score to each word and then evaluates a document by the sum of the
spam scores of its constituent words, so that a document with a total score
above a certain threshold value is classified as spam. The machine-learning
algorithm can then predict whether a new email is spam or not.
A second form of machine learning is unsupervised learning , where the
training data is unlabeled, as in the clustering problem of Section 33.1 . Here
the machine-learning algorithm produces hypotheses regarding the centers
of groups of input data points.
A third form of machine learning (not covered further here) is
reinforcement learning , where the machine-learning algorithm takes
actions in an environment, receives feedback for those actions from the
environment, and then updates its model of the environment based on the
feedback. The learner is in an environment that has some state, and the
actions of the learner have an ef fect on that state. Reinforcement learning is
a natural choice for situations such as game playing or operating a self-
driving car .
Sometimes the goal in a supervised machine-learning application is not
making accurate predictions of labels for new examples, but rather
performing causal inference : finding an explanatory model that describes
Page number: 1174
how the various features of an input data point af fect its associated label.
Finding a model that fits a given set of training data well can be tricky . It
may involve sophisticated optimization methods that need to balance
between producing a hypothesis that fits the data well and producing a
hypothesis that is simple.
This chapter focuses on three problem domains: finding hypotheses that
group the input data points well (using a clustering algorithm), learning
which predictors (experts) to rely upon for making predictions in an online
learning problem (using the multiplicative-weights algorithm), and fitting a
model to data (using gradient descent).
Section 33.1  considers the clustering problem: how to divide a given set
of n  training data points into a given number k  of groups, or “clusters,”
based on a measure of how similar (or more accurately , how dissimilar)
points are to each other . The approach is iterative, beginning with an
arbitrary initial clustering and incorporating successive improvements until
no further improvements occur . Clustering is often used as an initial step
when working on a machine-learning problem to discover what structure
exists in the data.
Section 33.2  shows how to make online predictions quite accurately
when you have a set of predictors, often called “experts,” to rely on, many
of which might be poor predictors, but some of which are good predictors.
At first, you do not know which predictors are poor and which are good.
The goal is to make predictions on new examples that are nearly as good as
the predictions made by the best predictor . W e study an ef fective
multiplicative-weights prediction method that associates a positive real
weight with each predictor and multiplicatively decreases the weights
associated with predictors when they make poor predictions. The model in
this section is online (see Chapter 27 ): at each step, we do not know
anything about the future examples. In addition, we are able to make
predictions even in the presence of adversarial experts, who are
collaborating against us, a situation that actually happens in game-playing
settings.
Finally , Section 33.3  introduces gradient descent, a powerful
optimization technique used to find parameter settings in machine-learning
models. Gradient descent also has many applications outside of machine
learning. Intuitively , gradient descent finds the value that produces a local
minimum for a function by “walking downhill.” In a learning application, a
Page number: 1175
“downhill step” is a step that adjusts hypothesis parameters so that the
hypothesis does better on the given set of labeled examples.
This chapter makes extensive use of vectors. In contrast to the rest of the
book, vector names in this chapter appear in boldface, such as x , to more
clearly delineate which quantities are vectors. Components of vectors do
not appear in boldface, so if vector x  has d  dimensions, we might write x  =
( x1 , x2 , …, xd ).
33.1    Clustering
Suppose that you have a lar ge number of data points (examples), and you
wish to group them into classes based on how similar they are to each other .
For example, each data point might represent a celestial star , giving its
temperature, size, and spectral characteristics. Or , each data point might
represent a fragment of recorded speech. Grouping these speech fragments
appropriately might reveal the set of accents of the fragments. Once a
grouping of the training data points is found, new data can be placed into an
appropriate group, facilitating star -type recognition or speech recognition.
These situations, along with many others, fall under the umbrella of
clustering. The input to a clustering  problem is a set of n  examples
(objects) and an integer k , with the goal of dividing the examples into at
most k  disjoint clusters such that the examples in each cluster are similar to
each other . The clustering problem has several variations. For example, the
integer k  might not be given, but instead arises out of the clustering
procedure. In this section we presume that k  is given.
Featur e vectors and similarity
Let’ s formally define the clustering problem. The input is a set of
n  examples . Each example has a set of attributes  in common with all other
examples, though the attribute values may vary among examples. For
example, the clustering problem shown in Figure 33.1  clusters n  = 49
examples—48 state capitals plus the District of Columbia—into k  = 4
clusters. Each example has two attributes: the latitude and longitude of the
capital. In a given clustering problem, each example has d  attributes, with
an example x  specified by a d -dimensional feature vector
Page number: 1176
x  = ( x1 , x2 , …, xd ).
Here, xa  for a  = 1, 2, …, d  is a real number giving the value of attribute a
for example x . W e call x  the point  in ℝd representing the example. For the
example in Figure 33.1 , each capital x  has its latitude in x1  and its longitude
in x2 .
In order to cluster similar points together , we need to define similarity .
Instead, let’ s define the opposite: the dissimilarity  Δ( x , y ) of points x  and y
is the squared Euclidean distance between them:
Of course, for Δ( x , y ) to be well defined, all attribute values must be
present. If any are missing, then you might just ignore that example, or you
could fill in a missing attribute value with the median value for that
attribute.
The attribute values are often “messy” in other ways, so that some “data
cleaning” is necessary before the clustering algorithm is run. For example,
the scale of attribute values can vary widely across attributes. In the
example of Figure 33.1 , the scales of the two attributes vary by a factor of
2, since latitude ranges from −90 to +90 degrees but longitude ranges from
−180 to +180 degrees. Y ou can imagine other scenarios where the
dif ferences in scales are even greater . If the examples contain information
about students, one attribute might be grade-point average but another
might be family income. Therefore, the attribute values are usually scaled
or normalized, so that no single attribute can dominate the others when
computing dissimilarities. One way to do so is by scaling attribute values
with a linear transform so that the minimum value becomes 0 and the
maximum value becomes 1. If the attribute values are binary values, then
no scaling may be needed. Another option is scaling so that the values for
each attribute have mean 0 and unit variance. Sometimes it makes sense to
choose the same scaling rule for several related attributes (for example, if
they are lengths measured to the same scale).
Page number: 1177
Figur e 33.1  The iterations of Lloyd’ s procedure when clustering the capitals of the lower 48 states
and the District of Columbia into k  = 4 clusters. Each capital has two attributes: latitude and
longitude. Each iteration reduces the value f , measuring the sum of squares of distances of all capitals
to their cluster centers, until the value of f  does not change. (a)  The initial four clusters, with the
capitals of Arkansas, Kansas, Louisiana, and T ennessee chosen as centers. (b)–(k)  Iterations of
Lloyd’ s procedure. (l)  The 1 1th iteration results in the same value of f  as the 10th iteration in part (k),
and so the procedure terminates.
Also, the choice of dissimilarity measure is somewhat arbitrary . The use
of the sum of squared dif ferences as in equation (33.1) is not required, but it
Page number: 1178
is a conventional choice and mathematically convenient. For the example of
Figure 33.1 , you might use the actual distance between capitals rather than
equation (33.1).
Clusterings
W ith the notion of similarity (actually , dis similarity) defined, let’ s see how
to define clusters of similar points. Let S  denote the given set of n  points in
ℝd. In some applications the points are not necessarily distinct, so that S  is a
multiset rather than a set.
Because the goal is to create k  clusters, we define a k-clustering  of S  as
a decomposition of S  into a sequence 〈 S(1), S(2), …, S( k )〉  of k  disjoint
subsets, or clusters , so that
S  = S(1) ⋃  S(2) ⋃  ⋯  ⋃  S( k ).
A cluster may be empty , for example if k  > 1 but all of the points in S  have
the same attribute values.
There are many ways to define a k -clustering of S  and many ways to
evaluate the quality of a given k -clustering. W e consider here only k -
clusterings of S  that are defined by a sequence C  of k  centers
C  = 〈 c(1), c(2), …, c( k )〉 ,
where each center is a point in ℝd, and the nearest-center rule  says that a
point x  may belong to cluster S(ℓ) if the center of no other cluster is closer to
x  than the center c(ℓ) of S(ℓ):
x  ∈  S(ℓ) only if Δ( x , c(ℓ)) = min {Δ( x , c( j )): 1 ≤ j  ≤ k }.
A center can be anywhere, and not necessarily a point in S .
T ies are possible and must be broken so that each point lies in exactly
one cluster . In general, ties may be broken arbitrarily , although we’ll need
the property that we never change which cluster a point x  is assigned to
unless the distance from x  to its new cluster center is strictly smaller  than
the distance from x  to its old cluster center . That is, if the current cluster has
a center that is one of the closest cluster centers to x , then don’ t change
which cluster x  is assigned to.
The k-means problem  is then the following: given a set S  of n  points
and a positive integer k , find a sequence C  = 〈 c(1), c(2), …, c( k )〉  of k  center
Page number: 1179
points minimizing the sum f ( S , C ) of the squared distance from each point
to its nearest center , where
In the second line, the k -clustering 〈 S(1), S(2),…, S( k )〉  is defined by the centers
C  and the nearest-center rule. See Exercise 33.1-1 for an alternative
formulation based on pairwise interpoint distances.
Is there a polynomial-time algorithm for the k -means problem? Probably
not, because it is NP-hard [ 310 ]. As we’ll see in Chapter 34 , NP-hard
problems have no known polynomial-time algorithm, but nobody has ever
proven that polynomial-time algorithms for NP-hard problems cannot exist.
Although we know of no polynomial-time algorithm that finds the global
minimum over all clusterings (according to equation (33.2)), we can  find a
local minimum.
Lloyd [ 304 ] proposed a simple procedure that finds a sequence C  of k
centers that yields a local minimum of f ( S , C ). A local minimum in the k -
means problem satisfies two simple properties: each cluster has an optimal
center (defined below), and each point is assigned to the cluster (or one of
the clusters) with the closest center . Lloyd’ s procedure finds a good
clustering—possibly optimal—that satisfies these two properties. These
properties are necessary , but not suf ficient, for optimality .
Optimal center for a given cluster
In an optimal solution to the k -means problem, each center point must be
the centroid , or mean , of the points in its cluster . The centroid is a d -
dimensional point, where the value in each dimension is the mean of the
values of all the points in the cluster in that dimension (that is, the mean of
the corresponding attribute values in the cluster). That is, if c(ℓ) is the
centroid for cluster S(ℓ), then for attributes a  = 1, 2, …, d , we have
Over all attributes, we write
Page number: 1180
Theorem 33.1
Given a nonempty cluster S(ℓ), its centroid (or mean) is the unique choice
for the cluster center c(ℓ) ∈  ℝd that minimizes
Proof    W e wish to minimize, by choosing c(ℓ) ∈  ℝd, the sum
For each attribute a , the term summed is a convex quadratic function in 
 .
T o minimize this function, take its derivative with respect to 
  and set it to
0:
or , equivalently ,
Since the minimum is obtained uniquely when each coordinate of 
  is the
average of the corresponding coordinate for x  ∈  S(ℓ), the overall minimum
is obtained when c(ℓ) is the centroid of the points x , as in equation (33.3).
▪
Optimal clusters for given centers
The following theorem shows that the nearest-center rule—assigning each
point x  to one of the clusters whose center is nearest to x —yields an
optimal solution to the k -means problem.
Theorem 33.2
Page number: 1181
Given a set S  of n  points and a sequence 〈 c(1), c(2), …, c( k )〉  of k  centers, a
clustering 〈 S(1), S(2), …, S( k )〉  minimizes
if and only if it assigns each point x  ∈  S  to a cluster S(ℓ) that minimizes
Δ( x , c(ℓ)).
Proof    The proof is straightforward: each point x  ∈  S  contributes exactly
once to the sum (33.4), and choosing to put x  in a cluster whose center is
nearest minimizes the contribution from x .
▪
Lloyd’ s pr ocedur e
Lloyd’ s procedure just iterates two operations—assigning points to clusters
based on the nearest-center rule, followed by recomputing the centers of
clusters to be their centroids—until the results conver ge. Here is Lloyd’ s
procedure:
Input:  A set S  of points in ℝd, and a positive integer k .
Output:  A k -clustering 〈 S(1), S(2), …, S( k )〉  of S  with a sequence of centers
〈 c(1), c(2), …, c( k )〉 .
1 . Initialize centers:  Generate an initial sequence 〈 c(1), c(2), …, c( k )〉  of
k  centers by picking k  points independently from S  at random. (If
the points are not necessarily distinct, see Exercise 33.1-3.) Assign
all points to cluster S(1) to begin.
2 . Assign points to clusters:  Use the nearest-center rule to define the
clustering 〈 S(1), S(2), …, S( k )〉 . That is, assign each point x  ∈  S  to a
cluster S(ℓ) having a nearest center (breaking ties arbitrarily , but not
changing the assignment for a point x  unless the new cluster center
is strictly closer to x  than the old one).
3 . Stop if no change:  If step 2 did not change the assignments of any
points to clusters, then stop and return the clustering 〈 S(1), S(2), …,
Page number: 1182
S( k )〉  and the associated centers 〈 c(1), c(2), …, c( k )〉 . Otherwise, go to
step 4.
4 . Recompute centers as centr oids:  For ℓ = 1, 2, …, k , compute the
center c(ℓ) of cluster S(ℓ) as the centroid of the points in S(ℓ). (If S(ℓ)
is empty , let c(ℓ) be the zero vector .) Then go to step 2.
It is possible for some of the clusters returned to be empty , particularly if
many of the input points are identical.
Lloyd’ s procedure always terminates. By Theorem 33.1, recomputing
the centers of each cluster as the cluster centroid cannot increase f ( S , C ).
Lloyd’ s procedure ensures that a point is reassigned to a dif ferent cluster
only when such an operation strictly decreases f ( S , C ). Thus each iteration
of Lloyd’ s procedure, except the last iteration, must strictly decrease f ( S , C ).
Since there are only a finite number of possible k -clusterings of S  (at most
kn), the procedure must terminate. Furthermore, once one iteration of
Lloyd’ s procedure yields no decrease in f , further iterations would not
change anything, and the procedure can stop at this locally optimum
assignment of points to clusters.
If Lloyd’ s procedure really required kn iterations, it would be
impractical. In practice, it sometimes suf fices to terminate the procedure
when the percentage decrease in f ( S , C ) in the latest iteration falls below a
predetermined threshold. Because Lloyd’ s procedure is guaranteed to find
only a locally optimal clustering, one approach to finding a good clustering
is to run Lloyd’ s procedure many times with dif ferent randomly chosen
initial centers, taking the best result.
The running time of Lloyd’ s procedure is proportional to the number T
of iterations. In one iteration, assigning points to clusters based on the
nearest-center rule requires O ( dkn ) time, and recomputing new centers for
each cluster requires O ( dn ) time (because each point is in one cluster). The
overall running time of the k -means procedure is thus O ( Tdkn ).
Lloyd’ s algorithm illustrates an approach common to many machine-
learning algorithms:
First, define a hypothesis space in terms an appropriate sequence θ  of
parameters, so that each θ  is associated with a specific hypothesis hθ .
(For the k -means problem, θ  is a dk -dimensional vector , equivalent to
C , containing the d -dimensional center of each of the k  clusters, and
Page number: 1183
hθ  is the hypothesis that each data point x  should be grouped with a
cluster having a center closest to x .)
Second, define a measure f ( E , θ ) describing how poorly hypothesis hθ
fits the given training data E . Smaller values of f ( E , θ ) are better , and
a (locally) optimal solution (locally) minimizes f ( E , θ ). (For the k -
means problem, f ( E , θ ) is just f ( S , C ).)
Third, given a set of training data E , use a suitable optimization
procedure to find a value of θ * that minimizes f ( E , θ *), at least
locally . (For the k -means problem, this value of θ * is the sequence C
of k  center points returned by Lloyd’ s algorithm.)
Return θ * as the answer .
In this framework, we see that optimization becomes a powerful tool for
machine learning. Using optimization in this way is flexible. For example,
regularization  terms can be incorporated in the function to be minimized,
in order to penalize hypotheses that are “too complicated” and that “overfit”
the training data. (Regularization is a complex topic that isn’ t pursued
further here.)
Examples
Figure 33.1  demonstrates Lloyd’ s procedure on a set of n  = 49 cities: 48
U.S. state capitals and the District of Columbia. Each city has d  = 2
dimensions: latitude and longitude. The initial clustering in part (a) of the
figure has the initial cluster centers arbitrarily chosen as the capitals of
Arkansas, Kansas, Louisiana, and T ennessee. As the procedure iterates, the
value of the function f  decreases, until the 1 1th iteration in part (l), where it
remains the same as in the 10th iteration in part (k). Lloyd’ s procedure then
terminates with the clusters shown in part (l).
As Figure 33.2  shows, Lloyd’ s procedure can also apply to “vector
quantization.” Here, the goal is to reduce the number of distinct colors
required to represent a photograph, thereby allowing the photograph to be
greatly compressed (albeit in a lossy manner). In part (a) of the figure, an
original photograph 700 pixels wide and 500 pixels high uses 24 bits (three
bytes) per pixel to encode a triple of red, green, and blue (RGB) primary
color intensities. Parts (b)–(e) of the figure show the results of using
Lloyd’ s procedure to compress the picture from a initial space of 224
Page number: 1184
possible values per pixel to a space of only k  = 4, k  = 16, k  = 64, or k  = 256
possible values per pixel; these k  values are the cluster centers. The
photograph can then be represented with only 2, 4, 6, or 8 bits per pixel,
respectively , instead of the 24-bits per pixel needed by the initial
photograph. An auxiliary table, the “palette,” accompanies the compressed
image; it holds the k  24-bit cluster centers and is used to map each pixel
value to its 24-bit cluster center when the photo is decompressed.
Exer cises
33.1-1
Show that the objective function f ( S , C ) of equation (33.2) may be
alternatively written as
33.1-2
Give an example in the plane with n  = 4 points and k  = 2 clusters where an
iteration of Lloyd’ s procedure does not improve f ( S , C ), yet the k -clustering
is not optimal.
33.1-3
When the input to Lloyd’ s procedure contains many repeated points, a
dif ferent initialization procedure might be used. Describe a way to pick a
number of centers at random that maximizes the number of distinct centers
picked. ( Hint:  See Exercise 5.3-5.)
33.1-4
Show how to find an optimal k -clustering in polynomial time when there is
just one attribute ( d  = 1).

Page number: 1185
Figur e 33.2  Using Lloyd’ s procedure for vector quantization to compress a photo by using fewer
colors. (a)  The original photo has 350,000 pixels (700 × 500), each a 24-bit RGB (red/blue/green)
triple of 8-bit values; these pixels (colors) are the “points” to be clustered. Points repeat, so there are
only 79,083 distinct colors (less than 224). After compression, only k  distinct colors are used, so each
pixel is represented by only ⌈ 1g k ⌉  bits instead of 24. A “palette” maps these values back to 24-bit
RGB values (the cluster centers). (b)–(e)  The same photo with k  = 4, 16, 64, and 256 colors. (Photo
from standuppaddle, pixabay .com.)
33.2    Multiplicative-weights algorithms
This section considers problems that require you to make a series of
decisions. After each decision you receive feedback as to whether your
decision was correct. W e will study a class of algorithms that are called
Page number: 1186
multiplicative-weights algorithms . This class of algorithms has a wide
variety of applications, including game playing in economics,
approximately solving linear -programming and multicommodity-flow
problems, and various applications in online machine learning. W e
emphasize the online nature of the problem here: you have to make a
sequence of decisions, but some of the information needed to make the i th
decision appears only after you have already made the ( i  – 1)st decision. In
this section, we look at one particular problem, known as “learning from
experts,” and develop an example of a multiplicative-weights algorithm,
called the weighted-majority algorithm.
Suppose that a series of events will occur , and you want to make
predictions about these events. For example, over a series of days, you want
to predict whether it is going to rain. Or perhaps you want to predict
whether the price of a stock will increase or decrease. One way to approach
this problem is to assemble a group of “experts” and use their collective
wisdom in order to make good predictions. Let’ s denote the experts, n  of
them, by E1 , E2 , …, En , and let’ s say that T  events are going to take place.
Each event has an outcome of either 0 or 1, with o( t ) denoting the outcome
of the t th event. Before event t , each expert E( i ) makes a prediction 
. Y ou, as the “learner ,” then take the set of n  expert predictions
for event t  and produce a single prediction p( t ) ∈  {0, 1} of your own. Y ou
base your prediction only on the predictions of the experts and anything you
have learned about the experts from their previous predictions. Y ou do not
use any additional information about the event. Only after making your
prediction do you ascertain the outcome o( t ) of event t . If your prediction p( t )
matches o( t ), then you were correct; otherwise, you made a mistake. The
goal is to minimize the total number m  of mistakes, where 
. Y ou can also keep track of the number of mistakes each
expert makes: expert Ei  makes mi  mistakes, where 
 .
For example, suppose that you are following the price of a stock, and
each day you decide whether to invest in it for just that day by buying it at
the beginning of the day and selling it at the end of the day . If, on some day ,
you buy the stock and it goes up, then you made the correct decision, but if
the stock goes down, then you made a mistake. Similarly , if on some day ,
you do not buy the stock and it goes down, then you made the correct
decision, but if the stock goes up, then you made a mistake. Since you
Page number: 1187
would like to make as few mistakes as possible, you use the advice of the
experts to make your decisions.
W e’ll assume nothing about the movement of the stock. W e’ll also
assume nothing about the experts: the experts’ predictions could be
correlated, they could be chosen to deceive you, or perhaps some are not
really experts after all. What algorithm would you use?
Before designing an algorithm for this problem, we need to consider
what is a fair way to evaluate our algorithm. It is reasonable to expect that
our algorithm performs better when the expert predictions are better , and
that it performs worse when the expert predictions are worse. The goal of
the algorithm is to limit the number of mistakes you make to be close to the
number of mistakes that the best of the experts makes. At first, this goal
might seem impossible, because you do not know until the end which
expert is best. W e’ll see, however , that by taking the advice provided by all
the experts into account, you can achieve this goal. More formally , we use
the notion of “regret,” which compares our algorithm to the performance of
the best expert (in hindsight) over all. Letting m * = min { mi  : 1 ≤ i  ≤ n }
denote the number of mistakes made by the best expert, the regret  is m  –
m *. The goal is to design an algorithm with low regret. (Regret can be
negative, although it typically isn’ t, since it is rare that you do better than
the best expert.)
As a warm-up, let’ s consider the case in which one of the experts makes
a correct prediction each time. Even without knowing who that expert is,
you can still achieve good results.
Lemma 33.3
Suppose that out of n  experts, there is one who always makes the correct
prediction for all T  events. Then there is an algorithm that makes at most
⌈ 1g n ⌉  mistakes.
Proof    The algorithm maintains a set S  consisting of experts who have not
yet made a mistake. Initially , S  contains all n  experts. The algorithm’ s
prediction is always the majority vote of the predictions of the experts
remaining in set S . In case of a tie, the algorithm makes any prediction.
After each outcome is learned, set S  is updated to remove all the experts
who made an incorrect prediction about that outcome.
W e now analyze the algorithm. The expert who always makes the
correct prediction will always be in set S . Every time the algorithm makes a
Page number: 1188
mistake, at least half of the experts who were still in S  also make a mistake,
and these experts are removed from S . If S ′ is the set of experts remaining
after removing those who made a mistake, we have that | S ′| ≤ | S |/2. The size
of S  can be halved at most ⌈ 1g n ⌉  times until | S | = 1. From this point on, we
know that the algorithm never makes a mistake, since the set S  consists only
of the one expert who never makes a mistake. Therefore, overall the
algorithm makes at most ⌈ 1g n ⌉  mistakes.
▪
Exercise 33.2-1 asks you to generalize this result to the case when there
is no expert who makes perfect predictions and show that, for any set of
experts, there is an algorithm that makes at most m * ⌈ 1g n ⌉  mistakes. The
generalized algorithm begins in the same way . The set S  might become
empty at some point, however . If that ever happens, reset S  to contain all the
experts and continue the algorithm.
Y ou can substantially improve your prediction ability by not just
tracking which experts have not made any mistakes, or have not made any
mistakes recently , to a more nuanced evaluation of the quality of each
expert. The key idea is to use the feedback you receive to update your
evaluation of how much trust to put in each expert. As the experts make
predictions, you observe whether they were correct and decrease your
confidence in the experts who make more mistakes. In this way , you can
learn over time which experts are more reliable and which are less reliable,
and weight their predictions accordlingly . The change in weights is
accomplished via multiplication, hence the term “multiplicative weights.”
The algorithm appears in the procedure W EIGHTED -M AJORITY  on the
following page, which takes a set E  = { E1 , E2 , …, En } of experts, a number
T  of events, the number n  of experts, and a parameter 0 < γ  ≤ 1/2 that
controls how the weights change. The algorithm maintains weights 
  for i
= 1, 2, …, n  and t  = 1, 2, …, T , where 
 . The for  loop of lines 1–2
sets the initial weights 
  to 1, capturing the idea that with no knowledge,
you trust each expert equally . Each iteration of the main for  loop of lines 3–
18 does the following for an event t  = 1, 2, …, T . Each expert Ei  makes a
prediction for event t  in line 4. Lines 5–8 compute upweight( t ), the sum of
the weights of the experts who predict 1 for event t , and downweight( t ), the
sum of the weights of the experts who predict 0 for the event. Lines 9–1 1
decide the algorithm’ s prediction p( t ) for event t  based on whichever
Page number: 1189
weighted sum is lar ger (breaking ties in favor of deciding 1). The outcome
of event t  is revealed in line 12. Finally , lines 14–17 decrease the weights of
the experts who made an incorrect prediction for event t  by multiplying
their weights by 1 – γ , leaving alone the weights of the experts who
correctly predicted the event’ s outcome. Thus, the fewer mistakes each
expert makes, the higher that expert’ s weight.
The W EIGHTED -M AJORITY  procedure doesn’ t do much worse than any
expert. In particular , it doesn’ t do much worse than the best expert. T o
quantify this claim, let m( t ) be the number of mistakes made by the
procedure through event t , and let 
  be the number of mistakes made by
expert Ei  through event t . The following theorem is the key .
W EIGHTED -M AJORITY ( E , T , n , γ )
  1 for  i  = 1 to  n
  2
 //  trust each expert equally
  3 for  t  = 1 to  T
  4each expert E i  ∈  E  makes a prediction 
  5
 //  experts who predicted 1
  6
 //  sum of weights of who predicted 1
  7
 //  experts who predicted 0
  8
 //  sum of weights of who predicted 0
  9if  upweight( t ) ≥ downweight( t )
10p( t ) = 1//  algorithm predicts 1
1 1else  p( t ) = 0//  algorithm predicts 0
12outcome o( t ) is revealed
13//  If p( t ) ≠ o( t ), the algorithm made a mistake.
14 for  i  = 1 to  n
15if  
 //  if expert E( i ) made a mistake …
16
 //  … then decrease that expert’ s weight
17else  
18r eturn  p( t )
Theorem 33.4
When running W EIGHTED -M AJORITY , we have, for every expert Ei  and every
event T ′ ≤ T ,
Page number: 1190
Proof    Every time an expert Ei  makes a mistake, its weight, which is
initially 1, is multiplied by 1 – γ , and so we have
for t  = 1, 2, …, T .
W e use a potential function 
 , summing the weights for all
n  experts after iteration t  of the for  loop of lines 3–18. Initially , we have
W (0) = n  since all n  weights start out with the value 1. Because each expert
belongs to either the set U  or the set D  (defined in lines 5 and 7 of
W EIGHTED -M AJORITY ), we always have W ( t ) = upweight( t ) + downweight( t )
after each execution of line 8.
Consider an iteration t  in which the algorithm makes a mistake in its
prediction, which means that either the algorithm predicts 1 and the
outcome is 0 or the algorithm predicts 0 and the outcome is 1. W ithout loss
of generality , assume that the algorithm predicts 1 and the outcome is 0.
The algorithm predicted 1 because upweight( t ) ≥ downweight( t ) in line 9,
which implies that
Each expert in U  then has its weight multiplied by 1 – γ , and each expert in
D  has its weight unchanged. Thus, we have
Therefore, for every iteration t  in which the algorithm makes a mistake, we
have
In an iteration where the algorithm does not make a mistake, some of the
weights decrease and some remain unchanged, so that we have
Page number: 1191
Since there are m( T ′) mistakes made through iteration T ′, and W (1) = n , we
can repeatedly apply inequality (33.8) to iterations where the algorithm
makes a mistake and inequality (33.9) to iterations where the algorithm
does not make a mistake, obtaining
Because the function W  is the sum of the weights and all weights are
positive, its value exceeds any single weight. Therefore, using equation
(33.6) we have, for any expert Ei  and for any iteration T ′ ≤ T ,
Combining inequalities (33.10) and (33.1 1) gives
T aking the natural logarithm of both sides yields
W e now use the T aylor series expansion to derive upper and lower
bounds on the logarithmic factors in inequality (33.12). The T aylor series
for ln(1+ x ) is given in equation (3.22) on page 67. Substituting − x  for x , we
have that for 0 < x  ≤ 1/2,
Since each term on the right-hand side is negative, we can drop all terms
except the first and obtain an upper bound of ln(1 – x ) ≤ − x . Since 0 < γ  ≤
1/2, we have
For the lower bound, Exercise 33.2-2 asks you to show that ln(1 – x ) ≥ − x  −
x2 when 0 < x  ≤ 1/2, so that
Thus, we have
Page number: 1192
so that
Subtracting ln n  from both sides of inequality (33.16) and then multiplying
both sides by −2/ γ  yields 
 , thus proving the
theorem.
▪
Theorem 33.4 applies to any expert and any event T ′ ≤ T . In particular ,
we can compare against the best expert after all events have occurred,
producing the following corollary .
Corollary 33.5
At the end of procedure W EIGHTED -M AJORITY , we have
▪
Let’ s explore this bound. Assuming that 
 , we can choose 
 and plug into inequality (33.17) to obtain
and so the number of errors is at most twice the number of errors made by
the best expert plus a term that is often slower growing than m *. Exercise
33.2-4 shows that you can decrease the bound on the number of errors by a
factor of 2 by using randomization, which leads to much stronger bounds.
In particular , the upper bound on regret ( m  – m *) is reduced from (1 +
2 γ ) m * + (2 ln n )/ γ  to an expected value of ϵ m * + (ln n )/ ϵ , where both γ  and
ϵ  are at most 1/2. Numerically , we can see that if γ  = 1/2, W EIGHTED -
M AJORITY  makes at most 3 times the number of errors as the best expert,
Page number: 1193
plus 4 ln n  errors. As another example, suppose that T  = 1000 predictions
are being made by n  = 20 experts, and the best expert is correct 95% of the
time, making 50 errors. Then W EIGHTED -M AJORITY  makes at most
100(1+ γ )+2 ln 20/ γ  errors. By choosing γ  = 1/4, W EIGHTED -M AJORITY
makes at most 149 errors, or a success rate of at least 85%.
Multiplicative weights methods typically refer to a broader class of
algorithms that includes W EIGHTED -M AJORITY . The outcomes and
predictions need not be only 0 or 1, but can be real numbers, and there can
be a loss associated with a particular outcome and prediction. The weights
can be updated by a multiplicative factor that depends on the loss, and the
algorithm can, given a set of weights, treat them as a distribution on experts
and use them to choose an expert to follow in each event. Even in these
more general settings, bounds similar to Theorem 33.4 hold.
Exer cises
33.2-1
The proof of Lemma 33.3 assumes that some expert never makes a mistake.
It is possible to generalize the algorithm and analysis to remove this
assumption. The new algorithm begins in the same way . The set S  might
become empty at some point, however . If that ever happens, reset S  to
contain all the experts and continue the algorithm. Show that the number of
mistakes that this algorithm makes is at most m * ⌈ 1g n ⌉ .
33.2-2
Show that ln(1 – x ) ≥ − x  – x2 when 0 < x  ≤ 1/2. ( Hint:  Start with equation
(33.13), group all the terms after the first three, and use equation (A.7) on
page 1 142.)
33.2-3
Consider a randomized variant of the algorithm given in the proof of
Lemma 33.3, in which some expert never makes a mistake. At each step,
choose an expert Ei  uniformly at random from the set S  and then make the
same predication as Ei . Show that the expected number of mistakes made
by this algorithm is ⌈ 1g n ⌉ .
33.2-4
Page number: 1194
Consider a randomized version of W EIGHTED -M AJORITY . The algorithm is
the same, except for the prediction step, which interprets the weights as a
probability distribution over the experts and chooses an expert Ei  according
to that distribution. It then chooses its prediction to be the same as the
prediction made by expert Ei . Show that, for any 0 < ϵ  < 1/2, the expected
number of mistakes made by this algorithm is at most (1 + ϵ ) m * + (ln n )/ ϵ .
33.3    Gradient descent
Suppose that you have a set { p1 , p2 , …, pn } of points and you want to find
the line that best fits these points. For any line ℓ, there is a distance di
between each point pi  and the line. Y ou want to find the line that minimizes
some function f ( d1 , …, dn ). There are many possible choices for the
definition of distance and for the function f . For example, the distance can
be the projection distance to the line and the function can be the sum of the
squares of the distances. This type of problem is common in data science
and machine learning—the line is the hypothesis that best describes the data
—where the particular definition of best is determined by the definition of
distance and the objective f . If the definition of distance and the function f
are linear , then we have a linear -programming problem, as discussed in
Chapter 29 . Although the linear -programming framework captures several
important problems, many other problems, including various machine-
learning problems, have objectives and constraints that are not necessarily
linear . W e need frameworks and algorithms to solve such problems.
In this section, we consider the problem of optimizing a continuous
function and discuss one of the most popular methods to do so: gradient
descent. Gradient descent is a general method for finding a local minimum
of a function f  : ℝn → ℝ , where informally , a local minimum of a function f
is a point x  for which f ( x ) ≤ f ( x ′) for all x ′ that are “near” x . When the
function is convex, it can find a point near the global minimizer  of f : an n -
vector ar gument x  = ( x1 , x2 , …, xn ) such that f ( x ) is minimum. For the
intuitive idea behind gradient descent, imagine being in a landscape of hills
and valleys, and wanting to get to a low point as quickly as possible. Y ou
survey the terrain and choose to move in the direction that takes you
downhill the fastest from your current position. Y ou move in that direction,
Page number: 1195
but only for a short while, because as you proceed, the terrain changes and
you might need to choose a dif ferent direction. So you stop, reevaluate the
possible directions and move another short distance in the steepest downhill
direction, which might dif fer from the direction of your previous
movement. Y ou continue this process until you reach a point from which all
directions lead up. Such a point is a local minimum.
In order to make this informal procedure more formal, we need to define
the gradient of a function, which in the analogy above is a measure of the
steepness of the various directions. Given a function f  : ℝn → ℝ , its
gradient  ∇ f  is a function ∇ f  : ℝn → ℝn comprising n  partial derivatives: 
. Analogous to the derivative of a function of a
single variable, the gradient can be viewed as a direction in which the
function value locally increases the fastest, and the rate of that increase.
This view is informal; in order to make it formal we would have to define
what local means and place certain conditions, such as continuity or
existence of derivatives, on the function. Nevertheless, this view motivates
the key step of gradient descent—move in the direction opposite to the
gradient, by a distance influenced by the magnitude of the gradient.
The general procedure of gradient descent proceeds in steps. Y ou start at
some initial point x(0), which is an n -vector . At each step t , you compute the
value of the gradient of f  at point x( t ), that is, ( ∇ f )( x( t )), which is also an n -
vector . Y ou then move in the direction opposite to the gradient in each
dimension at x( t ) to arrive at the next point x( t +1), which again is an n -vector .
Because you moved in a monotonically decreasing direction in each
dimension, you should have that f ( x( t +1)) ≤ f ( x( t )). Several details are needed
to turn this idea into an actual algorithm. The two main details are that you
need an initial point and that you need to decide how far to move in the
direction of the negative gradient. Y ou also need to understand when to stop
and what you can conclude about the quality of the solution found. W e will
explore these issues further in this section, for both constrained
minimization, where there are additional constraints on the points, and
unconstrained minimization, where there are none.
Unconstrained gradient descent
In order to gain intuition, let’ s consider unconstrained gradient descent in
just one dimension, that is, when f  is a function of a scalar x , so that f  : ℝ  →
Page number: 1196
ℝ . In this case, the gradient ∇ f  of f  is just f ′( x ), the derivative of f  with
respect to x . Consider the function f  shown in blue in Figure 33.3 , with
minimizer x * and starting point x(0). The gradient (derivative) f ′( x(0)), shown
in orange, has a negative slope, so that a small step from x(0) in the direction
of increasing x  results in a point x ′ for which f ( x ′) < f ( x(0)). T oo lar ge a step,
however , results in a
Figur e 33.3  A function f  : ℝ  → ℝ , shown in blue. Its gradient at point x(0), in orange, has a negative
slope, and so a small increase in x  from x(0) to x ′ results in f ( x ′) < f ( x(0)). Small increases in x  from
x(0) head toward 
 , which gives a local minimum. T oo lar ge an increase in x  can end up at x ″, where
f ( x ″) > f ( x(0)). Small steps starting from x(0) and going only in the direction of decreasing values of f
cannot end up at the global minimizer x *.
point x ″ for which f ( x ″) > f ( x(0)), so this is a bad idea. Restricting ourselves
to small steps, where each one has f ( x ′) < f ( x ), eventually results in getting
close to point 
 , which gives a local minimum. By taking only small
downhill steps, however , gradient descent has no chance to get to the global
minimizer x *, given the starting point x(0).
W e draw two observations from this simple example. First, gradient
descent conver ges toward a local minimum, and not necessarily a global
minimum. Second, the speed at which it conver ges and how it behaves are
related to properties of the function, to the initial point, and to the step size
of the algorithm.
The procedure G RADIENT -D ESCENT  on the facing page takes as input a
function f , an initial point x(0) ∈  ℝn, a fixed step-size multiplier γ  > 0, and a
number T  > 0 of steps to take. Each iteration of the for  loop of lines 2–4
performs a step by computing the n -dimensional gradient at point x( t ) and
Page number: 1197
then moving distance γ  in the opposite direction in the n -dimensional space.
The complexity of computing the gradient depends on the function f  and
can sometimes be expensive. Line 3 sums the points visited. After the loop
terminates, line 6 returns x-avg , the average of all the points visited except
for the last one, x( T ). It might seem more natural to return x( T ), and in fact,
in many circumstances, you might prefer to have the function return x( T ).
For the version we will analyze, however , we use x-avg .
G RADIENT -D ESCENT ( f , x(0), γ , T )
1 sum  = 0 //  n -dimensional vector , initially all 0
2 for  t  = 0 to  T  – 1
3sum  = sum  + x( t ) //  add each of n  dimensions into sum
4x( t +1) = x( t ) – γ · ( ∇ f )(x( t )) //  ( ∇ f )( x( t )), x( t +1) are n -dimensional
5 x-avg  = sum / T //  divide each of n  dimensions by T
6 r eturn x-avg
Figure 33.4  depicts how gradient descent ideally runs on a convex 1-
dimensional function.1 W e’ll define convexity more formally below , but the
figure shows that each iteration moves in the direction opposite to the
gradient, with the distance moved being proportional to the magnitude of
the gradient. As the iterations proceed, the magnitude of the gradient
decreases, and thus the distance moved along the horizontal axis decreases.
After each iteration, the distance to the optimal point x*  decreases. This
ideal behavior is not guaranteed to occur in general, but the analysis in the
remainder of this section formalizes when this behavior occurs and
quantifies the number of iterations needed. Gradient descent does not
always work, however . W e have already seen that if the function is not
convex, gradient descent can conver ge to a local, rather than global,
minimum. W e have also seen that if the step size is too lar ge, G RADIENT -
D ESCENT  can overshoot the minimum and wind up farther away . (It is also
possible to overshoot the minimum and wind up closer to the optimum.)
Analysis of unconstrained gradient descent for convex functions
Our analysis of gradient descent focuses on convex functions. Inequality
(C.29) on page 1 194 defines a convex function of one variable, as shown in
Figure 33.5 . W e can extend that definition to a function f  : ℝn → ℝ  and say
that f  is convex  if for all x , y  ∈  ℝn and for all 0 ≤ λ ≤ 1, we have
Page number: 1198
(Inequalities (33.18) and (C.29) are the same, except for the dimensions of
x  and y .) W e also assume that our convex functions are closed2 and
dif ferentiable.
Figur e 33.4  An example of running gradient descent on a convex function f  : ℝ  → ℝ , shown in blue.
Beginning at point x(0), each iteration moves in the direction opposite to the gradient, and the
distance moved is proportional to the magnitude of the gradient. Orange lines represent the negative
of the gradient at each point, scaled by the step size γ . As the iterations proceed, the magnitude of the
gradient decreases, and the distance moved decreases correspondingly . After each iteration, the
distance to the optimal point x*  decreases.
Figur e 33.5  A convex function f  : ℝ  → ℝ , shown in blue, with local and global minimizer x* .
Because f  is convex, f ( λ x  + (1 – λ ) y ) ≤ λf ( x ) + (1 – λ ) f ( y ) for any two values x  and y  and all 0 ≤ λ  ≤ 1,
shown for a particular value of λ . Here, the orange line segment represents all values λf ( x ) + (1 –
λ ) f ( y ) for 0 ≤ λ  ≤ 1, and it is above the blue line.
A convex function has the property that any local minimum is also a
global minimum. T o verify this property , consider inequality (33.18), and
suppose for the purpose of contradiction that x  is a local minimum but not a
Page number: 1199
global minimum and y  ≠ x  is a global minimum, so f ( y ) < f ( x ). Then we
have
f ( λ x  + (1 – λ ) y ) ≤ λf ( x ) + (1 – λ ) f ( y ) (by inequality (33.18))
< λf ( x ) + (1 – λ ) f ( x )
= f ( x ).
Thus, letting approach 1, we see that there is another point near x , say x ′,
such that f ( x ′) < f ( x ), so x  is not a local minimum.
Convex functions have several useful properties. The first property ,
whose proof we leave as Exercise 33.3-1, says that a convex function
always lies above its tangent hyperplane. In the context of gradient descent,
angle brackets denote the notation for inner product defined on page 1219
rather than denoting a sequence.
Lemma 33.6
For any convex dif ferentiable function f  : ℝn → ℝ  and for all x , y  ∈  ℝn, we
have ≤ f ( x ) ≤ f ( y ) + 〈 ( ∇ f )( x ), x  – y〉 .
▪
The second property , which Exercise 33.3-2 asks you to prove, is a
repeated application of the definition of convexity in inequality (33.18).
Lemma 33.7
For any convex function f  : ℝn → ℝ , for any integer T  ≥ 1, and for all x(0),
…, x( T –1) ∈  ℝn, we have
▪
The left-hand side of inequality (33.19) is the value of f  at the vector x-
avg  that G RADIENT -D ESCENT  returns.
W e now proceed to analyze G RADIENT -D ESCENT . It might not return the
exact global minimizer x *. W e use an error bound ϵ , and we want to choose
T  so that f ( x-avg ) – f ( x *) ≤ ϵ  at termination. The value of ϵ  depends on the
number T  of iterations and two additional values. First, since you expect it
to be better to start close to the global minimizer , ϵ  is a function of

Page number: 1200
the euclidean norm (or distance, defined on page 1219) of the dif ference
between x(0) and x *. The error bound ϵ  is also a function of a quantity we
call L , which is an upper bound on the magnitude ∥ ( ∇ f )( x ) ∥  of the gradient,
so that
where x  ranges over all the points x(0), …, x( T –1) whose gradients are
computed by G RADIENT -D ESCENT . Of course, we don’ t know the values of L
and R , but for now let’ s assume that we do. W e’ll discuss later how to
remove these assumptions. The analysis of G RADIENT -D ESCENT  is
summarized in the following theorem.
Theorem 33.8
Let x * ∈  ℝn be the minimizer of a convex function f , and suppose that an
execution of G RADIENT -D ESCENT ( f , x(0), γ , T ) returns x-avg , where 
 and R  and L  are defined in equations (33.20) and (33.21). Let 
. Then we have f ( x-avg ) – f ( x *) ≤ ϵ .
▪
W e now prove this theorem. W e do not give an absolute bound on how
much progress each iteration makes. Instead, we use a potential function, as
in Section 16.3 . Here, we define a potential Φ( t ) after computing x( t ), such
that Φ( t ) ≥ 0 for t  = 0, …, T . W e define the amortized progress  in the
iteration that computes x( t ) as
Along with including the change in potential (Φ( t  + 1) – Φ( t )), equation
(33.22) also subtracts the minimum value f ( x *) because ultimately , you care
not about the values f ( x( t )) but about how close they are to f ( x *). Suppose
that we can show that p ( t ) ≤ B  for some value B  and t  = 0, …, T  – 1. Then
we can substitute for p ( t ) using equation (33.22), giving
Summing inequality (33.23) over t  = 0, …, T  – 1 yields

Page number: 1201
Observing that we have a telescoping series on the right and regrouping
terms, we have that
Dividing by T  and dropping the positive term Φ( T ) gives
and thus we have
In other words, if we can show that p ( t ) ≤ B  for some value B  and choose a
potential function where Φ(0) is not too lar ge, then inequality (33.25) tells
us how close the function value f ( x-avg ) is to the function value f ( x *) after
T  iterations. That is, we can set the error bound ϵ  to B  + Φ(0)/ T .
In order to bound the amortized progress, we need to come up with a
concrete potential function. Define the potential function Φ( t ) by
that is, the potential function is proportional to the square of the distance
between the current point and the minimizer x *. W ith this potential function
in hand, the next lemma provides a bound on the amortized progress made
in any iteration of G RADIENT -D ESCENT .
Lemma 33.9
Let x * ∈  ℝn be the minimizer of a convex function f , and consider an
execution of G RADIENT -D ESCENT ( f , x(0), γ , T ). Then for each point x( t )
computed by the procedure, we have that

Page number: 1202
Proof    W e first bound the potential change Φ( t  + 1) – Φ( t ). Using the
definition of Φ( t ) from equation (33.26), we have
From line 4 in G RADIENT -D ESCENT , we know that
and so we would like to rewrite equation (33.27) to have x( t +1) – x( t ) terms.
As Exercise 33.3-3 asks you to prove, for any two vectors a , b  ∈  ℝn, we
have
Letting a  = x( t ) – x * and b  = x( t +1) – x( t ), we can write the right-hand side of
equation (33.27) as 
 . Then we can express the potential
change as
and thus we have
W e can now proceed to bound p ( t ). By the bound on the potential
change from inequality (33.31), and using the definition of L  (inequality
(33.21)), we have
Page number: 1203
▪
sult in the following theorem
Having bounded the amortized progress in one step, we now analyze the
entire G RADIENT -D ESCENT  procedure, completing the proof of Theorem
33.8.
Proof of Theorem 33.8  Inequality (33.25) tells us that if we have an upper
bound of B  for p ( t ), then we also have the bound f ( x-avg ) – f ( x *) ≤ B  +
Φ(0)/ T . By equations (33.20) and (33.26), we have that Φ(0) = R2/(2 γ ).
Lemma 33.9 gives us the upper bound of B  = γL2/2, and so we have
Our choice of 
  in the statement of Theorem 33.8 balances the
two terms, and we obtain
Since we chose 
  in the theorem statement, the proof is complete.
▪
Continuing under the assumption that we know R  (from equation
(33.20)) and L  (from inequality (33.21)), we can think of the analysis in a
slightly dif ferent way . W e can presume that we have a tar get accuracy ϵ  and
then compute the number of iterations needed. That is, we can solve 
Page number: 1204
 for T , obtaining T  = R2L2/ ϵ2. The number of iterations thus
depends on the square of R  and L  and, most importantly , on 1/ ϵ2. (The
definition of L  from inequality (33.21) depends on T , but we may know an
upper bound on L  that doesn’ t depend on the particular value of T .) Thus, if
you want to halve your error bound, you need to run four times as many
iterations.
It is quite possible that we don’ t really know R  and L , since you’d need
to know x * in order to know R  (since R  = ∥ x(0) – x * ∥ ), and you might not
have an explicit upper bound on the gradient, which would provide L . Y ou
can, however , interpret the analysis of gradient descent as a proof that there
is some step size for which the procedure makes progress toward the
minimum. Y ou can then compute a step size for which f ( x( t )) – f ( x( t +1)) is
lar ge enough. In fact, not having a fixed step size multiplier can actually
help in practice, as you are free to use any step size s  that achieves
suf ficient decrease in the value of f . Y ou can search for a step size that
achieves a lar ge decrease via a binary-search-like routine, which is often
called line search . For a given function f  and step size s , define the function
g ( x( t ), s ) = f ( x( t )) – s ( ∇ f )( x( t )). Start with a small step size s  for which g ( x( t ),
s ) ≤ f ( x( t )). Then repeatedly double s  until g ( x( t ), 2 s ) ≥ g ( x( t ), s ), and then
perform a binary search in the interval [ s , 2 s ]. This procedure can produce a
step size that achieves a significant decrease in the objective function. In
other circumstances, however , you may know good upper bounds on R  and
L , typically from problem-specific information, which can suf fice.
The dominant computational step in each iteration of the for  loop of
lines 2–4 is computing the gradient. The complexity of computing and
evaluating a gradient varies widely , depending on the application at hand.
W e’ll discuss several applications later .
Constrained gradient descent
W e can adapt gradient descent for constrained minimization to minimize a
closed convex function f ( x ), subject to the additional requirement that x  ∈
K , where K  is a closed convex body . A body  K  ⊆  ℝn is convex  if for all x , y
∈  K , the convex combination λ x +(1– λ ) y  ∈  K  for all 0 ≤ λ  ≤ 1. A closed
convex body contains its limit points. Somewhat surprisingly , restricting to
the constrained problem does not significantly increase the number of
iterations of gradient descent. The idea is that you run the same algorithm,
Page number: 1205
but in each iteration, check whether the current point x( t ) is still within the
convex body K . If it is not, just move to the closest point in K . Moving to
the closest point is known as projection . W e formally define the projection
∏K ( x ) of a point x  in n  dimensions onto a convex body K  as the point y  ∈
K  such that ∥ x  – y ∥  = min { ∥ x  – z ∥  : z  ∈  K }. If we have x  ∈  K , then ∏K ( x )
= x .
This one change yields the procedure G RADIENT -D ESCENT -
CONSTRAINED, in which line 4 of G RADIENT -D ESCENT  is replaced by two
lines. It assumes that x(0) ∈  K . Line 4 of G RADIENT -D ESCENT -C ONSTRAINED
moves in the direction of the negative gradient, and line 5 projects back
onto K . The lemma that follows helps to show that when x * ∈  K , if the
projection step in line 5 moves from a point outside of K  to a point in K , it
cannot be moving away from x *.
G RADIENT -D ESCENT -C ONSTRAINED ( f , x(0), γ , T , K )
1 sum  = 0 //  n -dimensional vector , initially all 0
2 for  t  = 0 to  T  – 1
3sum  = sum  + x( t ) //  add each of n  dimensions into sum
4x′( t +1) = x( t ) – γ  · ( ∇ f )( x( t )) //  ( ∇ f )( x( t )), x′( t +1) are n -dimensional
5x( t +1) = ∏ K ( x( t +1))//  project onto K
6 x-avg  = sum / T //  divide each of n  dimensions by T
7 r eturn x-avg
Lemma 33.10
Consider a convex body K  ⊆  ℝn and points a  ∈  K  and b ′ ∈  ℝn. Let b  =
∏K ( b ′). Then ∥ b  – a ∥2 ≤ ∥ b ′ – a ∥2.
Proof    If b ′ ∈  K , then b  = b ′ and the claim is true. Otherwise, b ′ ≠ b , and
as Figure 33.6  shows, we can extend the line segment between b  and b ′ to a
line ℓ. Let c  be the projection of a  onto ℓ. Point c  may or may not be in K ,
and if a  is on the boundary of K , then c  could coincide with b . If c  coincides
with b  (part (c) of the figure), then abb ′ is a right triangle, and so ∥ b  – a ∥2 ≤
∥ b ′ – a ∥2. If c  does not coincide with b  (parts (a) and (b) of the figure), then
because of convexity , the angle ∠ abb ′ must be obtuse. Because angle
∠ abb ′ is obtuse, b  lies between c  and b ′ on ℓ. Furthermore, because c  is the
projection of a  onto line ℓ, acb  and acb ′ must be right triangles. By the
Page number: 1206
Pythagorean theorem, we have that ∥ b′ – a ∥2 = ∥ a  – c ∥2+ ∥ c  – b ′ ∥2 and ∥ b  –
a ∥2 = ∥ a  – c ∥2+ ∥ c  – b ∥2. Subtracting these two equations gives ∥ b ′ – a ∥2 –
∥ b  – a ∥2 = ∥ c  – b ′ ∥2 – ∥ c  – b ∥2. Because b  is between c  and b ′, we must
have ∥ c  – b ′ ∥2 ≥ ∥ c  – b ∥2, and thus ∥ b ′ – a ∥2 – ∥ b  – a ∥2 ≥ 0. The lemma
follows.
Figur e 33.6  Projecting a point b ′ outside the convex body K  to the closest point b  = ∏ K ( b ′) in K .
Line ℓ is the line containing b  and b ′, and point c  is the projection of a  onto ℓ. (a)  When c  is in K . (b)
When c  is not in K . (c)  When a  is on the boundary of K  and c  coincides with b .
▪
W e can now repeat the entire proof for the unconstrained case and obtain
the same bounds. Lemma 33.10 with a  = x *, b  = x( t +1), and b ′ = x′( t +1) tells
us that ∥ x( t +1)– x * ∥2 ≤ ∥ x′( t +1)– x * ∥2. W e can therefore derive an upper bound
that matches inequality (33.31). W e continue to define Φ( t ) as in equation
(33.26), but noting that x( t +1), computed in line 5 of G RADIENT -D ESCENT -
C ONSTRAINED , has a dif ferent meaning here from in inequality (33.31):

Page number: 1207
W ith the same upper bound on the change in the potential function as in
equation (33.30), the entire proof of Lemma 33.9 can proceed as before. W e
can therefore conclude that the procedure GRADIENT - DESCENT - CONSTRAINED
has the same asymptotic complexity as GRADIENT - DESCENT . W e summarize
this result in the following theorem.
Theorem 33.1 1
Let K  ⊆  ℝn be a convex body , x * ∈  ℝn be the minimizer of a convex
function f  over K , and 
 , where R  and L  are defined in
equations (33.20) and (33.21). Suppose that the vector x-avg  is returned by
an execution of G RADIENT -D ESCENT -C ONSTRAINED ( f , x(0), γ , T , K ). Let 
. Then we have f ( x-avg ) – f ( x *) ≤ ϵ .
▪
Applications of gradient descent
Gradient descent has many applications to minimizing functions and is
widely used in optimization and machine learning. Here we sketch how it
can be used to solve linear systems. Then we discuss an application to
machine learning: prediction using linear regression.
In Chapter 28 , we saw how to use Gaussian elimination to solve a
system of linear equations A x  = b , thereby computing x  = A−1b . If A  is an n
× n  matrix and b  is a length- n  vector , then the running time of Gaussian
elimination is Θ( n3), which for lar ge matrices might be prohibitively
expensive. If an approximate solution is acceptable, however , you can use
gradient descent.
First, let’ s see how to use gradient descent as a roundabout—and
admittedly inef ficient—way to solve for x  in the scalar equation ax  = b ,
where a , x , b  ∈  ℝ . This equation is equivalent to ax  – b  = 0. If ax  – b  is the
derivative of a convex function f ( x ), then ax  – b  = 0 for the value of x  that
minimizes f ( x ). Given f ( x ), gradient descent can then determine this
minimizer . Of course, f ( x ) is just the integral of ax  – b , that is, 
, which is convex if a  ≥ 0. Therefore, one way to solve ax  =
b  for a  ≥ 0 is to find the minimizer for 
  via gradient descent.
W e now generalize this idea to higher dimensions, where using gradient
descent may actually lead to a faster algorithm. One n -dimensional analog
is the function 
 , where A  is an n  × n  matrix. The gradient
Page number: 1208
of f  with respect to x  is the function A x  – b . T o find the value of x  that
minimizes f , we set the gradient of f  to 0 and solve for x . Solving A x – b  = 0
for x , we obtain x  = A−1b , Thus, minimizing f ( x ) is equivalent to solving A x
= b . If f ( x ) is convex, then gradient descent can approximately compute this
minimum.
A 1-dimensional function is convex when its second derivative is
positive. The equivalent definition for a multidimensional function is that it
is convex when its Hessian matrix is positive-semidefinite (see page 1222
for a definition), where the Hessian matrix  ( ∇2f )( x ) of a function f ( x ) is the
matrix in which entry ( i , j ) is the partial derivative of f  with respect to i  and
j :
Analogous to the 1-dimensional case, the Hessian of f  is just A , and so if A
is a positive-semidefinite matrix, then we can use gradient descent to find a
point x  where A x  ≈ b . If R  and L  are not too lar ge, then this method is faster
than using Gaussian elimination.
Gradient descent in machine learning
As a concrete example of supervised learning for prediction, suppose that
you want to predict whether a patient will develop heart disease. For each
of m  patients, you have n  dif ferent attributes. For example, you might have
n  = 4 and the four pieces of data are age, height, blood pressure, and
number of close family members with heart disease. Denote the data for
patient i  as a vector x( i ) ∈  ℝn, with 
  giving the j th entry in vector x( i ).
The label  of patient i  is denoted by a scalar y( i ) ∈  ℝ , signifying the severity
of the patient’ s heart disease. The hypothesis should capture a relationship
between the x( i ) values and y( i ). For this example, we make the modeling
assumption that the relationship is linear , and therefore the goal is to
compute the “best” linear relationship between the x( i ) values and y( i ): a
linear function f  : ℝn → ℝ  such that f ( x( i )) ≈ y( i ) for each patient i . Of
course, no such function may exist, but you would like one that comes as
Page number: 1209
close as possible. A linear function f  can be defined by a vector of weights
w  = ( w0 , w1 , …, wn ), with
When evaluating a machine-learning model, you need to measure how
close each value f ( x( i )) is to its corresponding label y( i ). In this example, we
define the error e( i ) ∈  ℝ  associated with patient i  as e( i ) = f ( x( i )) – y( i ). The
objective function we choose is to minimize the sum of squares of the
errors, which is
The objective function is typically called the loss function , and the
least-squares error  given by equation (33.33) is just one example of many
possible loss functions. The goal is then, given the x( i ) and y( i ) values, to
compute the weights w0 , w1 , …, wn  so as to minimize the loss function in
equation (33.33). The variables here are the weights w0 , w1 , …, wn  and not
the x( i ) or y( i ) values.
This particular objective is sometimes known as a least-squares fit , and
the problem of finding a linear function to fit data and minimize the least-
squares error is called linear regression . Finding a least-squares fit is also
addressed in Section 28.3 .
When the function f  is linear , the loss function defined in equation
(33.33) is convex, because it is the sum of squares of linear functions,
which are themselves convex. Therefore, we can apply gradient descent to
compute a set of weights to approximately minimize the least-squares error .
The concrete goal of learning is to be able to make predictions on new data.
Informally , if the features are all reported in the same units and are from the
same range (perhaps from being normalized), then the weights tend to have
a natural interpretation because the features of the data that are better
predictors of the label have a lar ger associated weight. For example, you
would expect that, after normalization, the weight associated with the
Page number: 1210
number of family members with heart disease would be lar ger than the
weight associated with height.
The computed weights form a model of the data. Once you have a
model, you can make predictions, so that given new data, you can predict
its label. In our example, given a new patient x ′ who is not part of the
original training data set, you would still hope to predict the chance that the
new patient develops heart disease. Y ou can do so by computing the label
f ( x ′), incorporating the weights computed by gradient descent.
For this linear -regression problem, the objective is to minimize the
expression in equation (33.33), which is a quadratic in each of the n +1
weights wj . Thus, entry j  in the gradient is linear in wj . Exercise 33.3-5 asks
you to explicitly compute the gradient and see that it can be computed in
O ( nm ) time, which is linear in the input size. Compared with the exact
method of solving equation (33.33) in Chapter 28 , which needs to invert a
matrix, gradient descent is typically much faster .
Section 33.1  briefly discussed regularization—the idea that a
complicated hypothesis should be penalized in order to avoid overfitting the
training data. Regularization often involves adding a term to the objective
function, but it can also be achieved by adding a constraint. One way to
regularize this example would be to explicitly limit the norm of the weights,
adding a constraint that ∥ w ∥  ≤ B  for some bound B  > 0. (Recall again that
the components of the vector w  are the variables in the present application.)
Adding this constraint controls the complexity of the model, as the number
of values wj  that can have lar ge absolute value is now limited.
In order to run G RADIENT -D ESCENT -C ONSTRAINED  for any problem, you
need to implement the projection step, as well as to compute bounds on R
and L . W e conclude this section by describing these calculations for
gradient descent with the constraint ∥ w ∥  ≤ B . First, consider the projection
step in line 5. Suppose that the update in line 4 results in a vector w ′. The
projection is implemented by computing ∏k ( w ′) where K  is defined by ∥ w ∥
≤ B . This particular projection can be accomplished by simply scaling w ′,
since we know that closest point in K  to w ′ must be the point along the
vector whose norm is exactly B . The amount z  by which we need to scale w ′
to hit the boundary of K  is the solution to the equation z  ∥ w ′ ∥  = B , which is
solved by z  = B / ∥ w ′ ∥ . Hence line 5 is implemented by computing w  = w ′ B /
∥ w ′ ∥ . Because we always have ∥ w ∥  ≤ B , Exercise 33.3-6 asks you to show
Page number: 1211
that the upper bound on the magnitude L  of the gradient is O ( B ). W e also
get a bound on R , as follows. By the constraint ∥ w ∥  ≤ B , we know that both
∥ w(0)∥  ≤ B  and ∥ w * ∥  ≤ B , and thus ∥ w(0) – w * ∥  ≤ 2 B . Using the definition
of R  in equation (33.20), we have R  = O ( B ). The bound 
  on the
accuracy of the solution after T  iterations in Theorem 33.1 1 becomes 
.
Exer cises
33.3-1
Prove Lemma 33.6. Start from the definition of a convex function given in
equation (33.18). ( Hint:  Y ou can prove the statement when n  = 1 first. The
proof for general values of n  is similar .)
33.3-2
Prove Lemma 33.7.
33.3-3
Prove equation (33.29). ( Hint:  The proof for n  = 1 dimension is
straightforward. The proof for general values of n  dimensions follows along
similar lines.)
33.3-4
Show that the function f  in equation (33.32) is a convex function of the
variables w0 , w1 , …, wn .
33.3-5
Compute the gradient of expression (33.33) and explain how to evaluate the
gradient in O ( nm ) time.
33.3-6
Consider the function f  defined in equation (33.32), and suppose that you
have a bound ∥ w ∥  ≤ B , as is considered in the discussion on regularization.
Show that L  = O ( B ) in this case.
33.3-7
Equation (33.2) on page 1009 gives a function that, when minimized, gives
an optimal solution to the k -means problem. Explain how to use gradient
descent to solve the k -means problem.
Page number: 1212
Pr oblems
33-1     Newton’ s method
Gradient descent iteratively moves closer to a desired value (the minimum)
of a function. Another algorithm in this spirit is known as Newton’ s
method , which is an iterative algorithm that finds the root of a function.
Here, we consider Newton’ s method which, given a function f  : ℝ  → ℝ ,
finds a value x * such that f ( x * ) = 0. The algorithm moves through a series
of points x(0), x(1), …. If the algorithm is currently at a point x( t ), then to find
point x( t +1), it first takes the equation of the line tangent to the curve at x  =
x( t ),
y  = f ′( x( t ))( x  – x( t )) + f ( x( t )).
It then uses the x -intercept of this line as the next point x( t +1).
a.  Show that the algorithm described above can be summarized by the
update rule
W e restrict our attention to some domain I  and assume that f ′( x ) ≠ 0 for all x
∈  I  and that f ″( x ) is continuous. W e also assume that the starting point x(0)
is suf ficiently close to x *, where “suf ficiently close” means that we can use
only the first two terms of the T aylor expansion of f ( x *) about x(0), namely
where γ(0) is some value between x(0) and x *. If the approximation in
equation (33.34) holds for x(0), it also holds for any point closer to x *.
b.  Assume that the function f  has exactly one point x * for which f ( x *) = 0.
Let ϵ( t ) = | x( t ) – x *|. Using the T aylor expansion in equation (33.34), show
that
where γ( t ) is some value between x( t ) and x *.
Page number: 1213
c.  If
for some constant c  and ϵ(0) < 1, then we say that the function f  has
quadratic convergence , since the error decreases quadratically . Assuming
that f  has quadratic conver gence, how many iterations are needed to find a
root of f ( x ) to an accuracy of δ ? Y our answer should include δ .
d.  Suppose you wish to find a root of the function f ( x ) = ( x  – 3)2, which is
also the minimizer , and you start at x(0) = 3.5. Compare the number of
iterations needed by gradient descent to find the minimizer and Newton’ s
method to find the root.
33-2     Hedge
Another variant in the multiplicative-weights framework is known as
H EDGE . It dif fers from W EIGHTED  M AJORITY  in two ways. First, H EDGE
makes the prediction randomly—in iteration t , it assigns a probability 
 to expert Ei , where 
 . It then chooses an expert
Ei ′  according to this probability distribution and predicts according to Ei ′ .
Second, the update rule is dif ferent. If an expert makes a mistake, line 16
updates that expert’ s weight by the rule 
 , for some 0 < ϵ  < 1.
Show that the expected number of mistakes made by H EDGE , running for T
rounds, is at most m * + (ln n )/ ϵ  + ϵ T .
33-3     Nonoptimality of Lloyd’ s procedure in one dimension
Give an example to show that even in one dimension, Lloyd’ s procedure for
finding clusters does not always return an optimum result. That is, Lloyd’ s
procedure may terminate and return as a result a set C  of clusters that does
not minimize f ( S , C ), even when S  is a set of points on a line.
33-4     Stochastic gradient descent
Consider the problem described in Section 33.3  of fitting a line f ( x ) = ax  + b
to a given set of point/value pairs S  = {( x1 , y1 ), …, ( xT , yT )} by optimizing
the choice of the parameters a  and b  using gradient descent to find a best
Page number: 1214
least-squares fit. Here we consider the case where x  is a real-valued
variable, rather than a vector .
Suppose that you are not given the point/value pairs in S  all at once, but
only one at a time in an online manner . Furthermore, the points are given in
random order . That is, you know that there are n  points, but in iteration t
you are given only ( xi , yi ) where i  is independently and randomly chosen
from {1, …, T }.
Y ou can use gradient descent to compute an estimate to the function. As
each point ( xi , yi ) is considered, you can update the current values of a  and
b  by taking the derivative with respect to a  and b  of the term of the
objective function depending on ( xi , yi ). Doing so gives you a stochastic
estimate of the gradient, and you can then take a small step in the opposite
direction.
Give pseudcode to implement this variant of gradient descent. What
would the expected value of the error be as a function of T , L , and R ? ( Hint:
Replicate the analysis of G RADIENT -D ESCENT  in Section 33.3  for this
variant.)
This procedure and its variants are known as stochastic gradient
descent .
Chapter notes
For a general introduction to artificial intelligence, we recommend Russell
and Norvig [ 391 ]. For a general introduction to machine learning, we
recommend Murphy [ 340 ].
Lloyd’ s procedure for the k -means problem was first proposed by Lloyd
[ 304 ] and also later by For gy [ 151 ]. It is sometimes called “Lloyd’ s
algorithm” or the “Lloyd-For gy algorithm.” Although Mahajan et al. [ 310 ]
showed that finding an optimal clustering is NP-hard, even in the plane,
Kanungo et al. [ 241 ] have shown that there is an approximation algorithm
for the k -means problem with approximation ratio 9 + ϵ , for any ϵ  > 0.
The multiplicative-weights method is surveyed by Arora, Hazan, and
Kale [ 25 ]. The main idea of updating weights based on feedback has been
rediscovered many times. One early use is in game theory , where Brown
defined “Fictitious Play” [ 74 ] and conjectured its conver gence to the value
Page number: 1215
of a zero-sum game. The conver gence properties were established by
Robinson [ 382 ].
In machine learning, the first use of multiplicative weights was by
Littlestone in the W innow algorithm [ 300 ], which was later extended by
Littlestone and W armuth to the weighted-majority algorithm described in
Section 33.2  [ 301 ]. This work is closely connected to the boosting
algorithm, originally due to Freund and Shapire [ 159 ]. The multiplicative-
weights idea is also closely related to several more general optimization
algorithms, including the perceptron algorithm [ 328 ] and algorithms for
optimization problems such as packing linear programs [ 177 , 359 ].
The treatment of gradient descent in this chapter draws heavily on the
unpublished manuscript of Bansal and Gupta [ 35 ]. They emphasize the idea
of using a potential function and using ideas from amortized analysis to
explain gradient descent. Other presentations and analyses of gradient
descent include works by Bubeck [ 75 ], Boyd and V anderber ghe [ 69 ], and
Nesterov [ 343 ].
Gradient descent is known to conver ge faster when functions obey
stronger properties than general convexity . For example, a function f  is α-
strongly convex  if f ( y ) ≥ f ( x ) + 〈 ( ∇ f )( x ), ( y  – x )〉  + α ∥ y  – x ∥  for all x , y  ∈
ℝn. In this case, G RADIENT -D ESCENT  can use a variable step size and return
x( T ). The step size at step t  becomes γt  = 1/( α ( t  + 1)), and the procedure
returns a point such that f ( x-avg ) – f ( x *) ≤ L2/( α ( T  + 1)). This conver gence
is better than that of Theorem 33.8 because the number of iterations needed
is linear , rather than quadratic, in the desired error parameter ϵ , and because
the performance is independent of the initial point.
Another case in which gradient descent can be shown to perform better
than the analysis in Section 33.3  suggests is for smooth convex functions.
W e say that a function is β-smooth  if 
. This inequality goes in the opposite
direction from the one for ≈ -strong convexity . Better bounds on gradient
descent are possible here as well.
1 Although the curve in Figure 33.4  looks concave, according to the definition of convexity that we’ll
see below , the function f  in the figure is convex.
Page number: 1216
2 A function f  : ℝn → ℝ  is closed if, for each α  ∈  ℝ , the set { x  ∈  dom( f ) : f ( x ) ≤ α } is closed, where
dom( f ) is the domain of f .
Page number: 1217
34        NP-Completeness
Almost all the algorithms we have studied thus far have been polynomial-
time algorithms : on inputs of size n , their worst-case running time is O ( nk)
for some constant k . Y ou might wonder whether all  problems can be solved
in polynomial time. The answer is no. For example, there are problems,
such as T uring’ s famous “Halting Problem,” that cannot be solved by any
computer , no matter how long you’re willing to wait for an answer .1 There
are also problems that can be solved, but not in O ( nk) time for any constant
k . Generally , we think of problems that are solvable by polynomial-time
algorithms as being tractable, or “easy ,” and problems that require
superpolynomial time as being intractable, or “hard.”
The subject of this chapter , however , is an interesting class of problems,
called the “NP-complete” problems, whose status is unknown. No
polynomial-time algorithm has yet been discovered for an NP-complete
problem, nor has anyone yet been able to prove that no polynomial-time
algorithm can exist for any one of them. This so-called P ≠ NP question has
been one of the deepest, most perplexing open research problems in
theoretical computer science since it was first posed in 1971.
Several NP-complete problems are particularly tantalizing because they
seem on the surface to be similar to problems that we know how to solve in
polynomial time. In each of the following pairs of problems, one is solvable
in polynomial time and the other is NP-complete, but the dif ference
between the problems appears to be slight:
Shortest versus longest simple paths:  In Chapter 22 , we saw that even
with negative edge weights, we can find shortest  paths from a single
source in a directed graph G  = ( V , E ) in O ( VE ) time. Finding a longest
Page number: 1218
simple path between two vertices is dif ficult, however . Merely
determining whether a graph contains a simple path with at least a given
number of edges is NP-complete.
Euler tour versus hamiltonian cycle:  An Euler tour  of a strongly
connected, directed graph G  = ( V , E ) is a cycle that traverses each edge  of
G  exactly once, although it is allowed to visit each vertex more than once.
Problem 20-3 on page 583 asks you to show how to determine whether a
strongly connected, directed graph has an Euler tour and, if it does, the
order of the edges in the Euler tour , all in O ( E ) time. A hamiltonian cycle
of a directed graph G  = ( V , E ) is a simple cycle that contains each vertex
in V . Determining whether a directed graph has a hamiltonian cycle is
NP-complete. (Later in this chapter , we’ll prove that determining whether
an undir ected  graph has a hamiltonian cycle is NP-complete.)
2-CNF satisfiability versus 3-CNF satisfiability:  Boolean formulas
contain binary variables whose values are 0 or 1; boolean connectives
such as ∧  (AND), ∨  (OR), and ¬ (NOT); and parentheses. A boolean
formula is satisfiable  if there exists some assignment of the values 0 and
1 to its variables that causes it to evaluate to 1. W e’ll define terms more
formally later in this chapter , but informally , a boolean formula is in k-
conjunctive normal form , or k -CNF if it is the AND of clauses of ORs of
exactly k  variables or their negations. For example, the boolean formula
( x1  ∨  x2 ) ∧  (¬ x1  ∨  x3 ) ∧  (¬ x2  ∨  ¬ x3 ) is in 2-CNF (with satisfying
assignment x1  = 1, x2  = 0, and x3  = 1). Although there is a polynomial-
time algorithm to determine whether a 2-CNF formula is satisfiable, we’ll
see later in this chapter that determining whether a 3-CNF formula is
satisfiable is NP-complete.
NP-completeness and the classes P and NP
Throughout this chapter , we refer to three classes of problems: P , NP , and
NPC, the latter class being the NP-complete problems. W e describe them
informally here, with formal definitions to appear later on.
The class P consists of those problems that are solvable in polynomial
time. More specifically , they are problems that can be solved in O ( nk) time
for some constant k , where n  is the size of the input to the problem. Most of
the problems examined in previous chapters belong to P .
Page number: 1219
The class NP consists of those problems that are “verifiable” in
polynomial time. What do we mean by a problem being verifiable? If you
were somehow given a “certificate” of a solution, then you could verify that
the certificate is correct in time polynomial in the size of the input to the
problem. For example, in the hamiltonian-cycle problem, given a directed
graph G  = ( V , E ), a certificate would be a sequence 〈 v1 , v2 , v3 , …, v| V |〉  of | V |
vertices. Y ou could check in polynomial time that the sequence contains
each of the | V | vertices exactly once, that ( vi , vi +1 ) ∈  E  for i  = 1, 2, 3, …, | V |
− 1, and that ( v| V | , v1 ) ∈  E . As another example, for 3-CNF satisfiability , a
certificate could be an assignment of values to variables. Y ou could check
in polynomial time that this assignment satisfies the boolean formula.
Any problem in P also belongs to NP , since if a problem belongs to P
then it is solvable in polynomial time without even being supplied a
certificate. W e’ll formalize this notion later in this chapter , but for now you
can believe that P ⊆  NP . The famous open question is whether P is a proper
subset of NP .
Informally , a problem belongs to the class NPC—and we call it NP-
complete —if it belongs to NP and is as “hard” as any problem in NP . W e’ll
formally define what it means to be as hard as any problem in NP later in
this chapter . In the meantime, we state without proof that if any  NP-
complete problem can be solved in polynomial time, then every  problem in
NP has a polynomial-time algorithm. Most theoretical computer scientists
believe that the NP-complete problems are intractable, since given the wide
range of NP-complete problems that have been studied to date—without
anyone having discovered a polynomial-time solution to any of them—it
would be truly astounding if all of them could be solved in polynomial
time. Y et, given the ef fort devoted thus far to proving that NP-complete
problems are intractable—without a conclusive outcome—we cannot rule
out the possibility that the NP-complete problems could turn out to be
solvable in polynomial time.
T o become a good algorithm designer , you must understand the
rudiments of the theory of NP-completeness. If you can establish a problem
as NP-complete, you provide good evidence for its intractability . As an
engineer , you would then do better to spend your time developing an
approximation algorithm (see Chapter 35 ) or solving a tractable special
case, rather than searching for a fast algorithm that solves the problem
Page number: 1220
exactly . Moreover , many natural and interesting problems that on the
surface seem no harder than sorting, graph searching, or network flow are
in fact NP-complete. Therefore, you should become familiar with this
remarkable class of problems.
Overview of showing pr oblems to be NP-complete
The techniques used to show that a particular problem is NP-complete
dif fer fundamentally from the techniques used throughout most of this book
to design and analyze algorithms. If you can demonstrate that a problem is
NP-complete, you are making a statement about how hard it is (or at least
how hard we think it is), rather than about how easy it is. If you prove a
problem NP-complete, you are saying that searching for ef ficient algorithm
is likely to be a fruitless endeavor . In this way , NP-completeness proofs
bear some similarity to the proof in Section 8.1  of an Ω( n  lg n )-time lower
bound for any comparison sort algorithm, although the specific techniques
used for showing NP-completeness dif fer from the decision-tree method
used in Section 8.1 .
W e rely on three key concepts in showing a problem to be NP-complete:
Decision problems versus optimization problems
Many problems of interest are optimization problems , in which each
feasible (i.e., “legal”) solution has an associated value, and the goal is to
find a feasible solution with the best value. For example, in a problem that
we call SHOR TEST -P A TH, the input is an undirected graph G  and vertices
u  and v , and the goal is to find a path from u  to v  that uses the fewest edges.
In other words, SHOR TEST -P A TH is the single-pair shortest-path problem
in an unweighted, undirected graph. NP-completeness applies directly not
to optimization problems, however , but to decision problems , in which the
answer is simply “yes” or “no” (or , more formally , “1” or “0”).
Although NP-complete problems are confined to the realm of decision
problems, there is usually a way to cast a given optimization problem as a
related decision problem by imposing a bound on the value to be optimized.
For example, a decision problem related to SHOR TEST -P A TH is P A TH:
given an undirected graph G , vertices u  and v , and an integer k , does a path
exist from u  to v  consisting of at most k  edges?
Page number: 1221
The relationship between an optimization problem and its related
decision problem works in your favor when you try to show that the
optimization problem is “hard.” That is because the decision problem is in a
sense “easier ,” or at least “no harder .” As a specific example, you can solve
P A TH by solving SHOR TEST -P A TH and then comparing the number of
edges in the shortest path found to the value of the decision-problem
parameter k . In other words, if an optimization problem is easy , its related
decision problem is easy as well. Stated in a way that has more relevance to
NP-completeness, if you can provide evidence that a decision problem is
hard, you also provide evidence that its related optimization problem is
hard. Thus, even though it restricts attention to decision problems, the
theory of NP-completeness often has implications for optimization
problems as well.
Reductions
The above notion of showing that one problem is no harder or no easier
than another applies even when both problems are decision problems.
Almost every NP-completeness proof takes advantage of this idea, as
follows. Consider a decision problem A , which you would like to solve in
polynomial time. W e call the input to a particular problem an instance  of
that problem. For example, in P A TH, an instance is a particular graph G ,
particular vertices u  and v  of G , and a particular integer k . Now suppose that
you already know how to solve a dif ferent decision problem B  in
polynomial time. Finally , suppose that you have a procedure that transforms
any instance α  of A  into some instance β  of B  with the following
characteristics:
Figur e 34.1  How to use a polynomial-time reduction algorithm to solve a decision problem A  in
polynomial time, given a polynomial-time decision algorithm for another problem B . In polynomial
time, transform an instance α  of A  into an instance β  of B , solve B  in polynomial time, and use the
answer for β  as the answer for α .
The transformation takes polynomial time.
Page number: 1222
The answers are the same. That is, the answer for α  is “yes” if and
only if the answer for β  is also “yes.”
W e call such a procedure a polynomial-time reduction algorithm  and, as
Figure 34.1  shows, it provides us a way to solve problem A  in polynomial
time:
1 . Given an instance α  of problem A , use a polynomial-time reduction
algorithm to transform it to an instance β  of problem B .
2 . Run the polynomial-time decision algorithm for B  on the instance β .
3 . Use the answer for β  as the answer for α .
As long as each of these steps takes polynomial time, all three together do
also, and so you have a way to decide on α  in polynomial time. In other
words, by “reducing” solving problem A  to solving problem B , you use the
“easiness” of B  to prove the “easiness” of A .
Recalling that NP-completeness is about showing how hard a problem is
rather than how easy it is, you use polynomial-time reductions in the
opposite way to show that a problem is NP-complete. Let’ s take the idea a
step further and show how you can use polynomial-time reductions to show
that no polynomial-time algorithm can exist for a particular problem B .
Suppose that you have a decision problem A  for which you already know
that no polynomial-time algorithm can exist. (Ignore for the moment how to
find such a problem A .) Suppose further that you have a polynomial-time
reduction transforming instances of A  to instances of B . Now you can use a
simple proof by contradiction to show that no polynomial-time algorithm
can exist for B . Suppose otherwise, that is, suppose that B  has a polynomial-
time algorithm. Then, using the method shown in Figure 34.1 , you would
have a way to solve problem A  in polynomial time, which contradicts the
assumption that there is no polynomial-time algorithm for A .
T o prove that a problem B  is NP-complete, the methodology is similar .
Although you cannot assume that there is absolutely no polynomial-time
algorithm for problem A , you prove that problem B  is NP-complete on the
assumption that problem A  is also NP-complete.
A first NP-complete problem
Page number: 1223
Because the technique of reduction relies on having a problem already
known to be NP-complete in order to prove a dif ferent problem NP-
complete, there must be some “first” NP-complete problem. W e’ll use the
circuit-satisfiability problem, in which the input is a boolean combinational
circuit composed of AND, OR, and NOT gates, and the question is whether
there exists some set of boolean inputs to this circuit that causes its output
to be 1. Section 34.3  will prove that this first problem is NP-complete.
Chapter outline
This chapter studies the aspects of NP-completeness that bear most directly
on the analysis of algorithms. Section 34.1  formalizes the notion of
“problem” and defines the complexity class P of polynomial-time solvable
decision problems. W e’ll also see how these notions fit into the framework
of formal-language theory . Section 34.2  defines the class NP of decision
problems whose solutions are verifiable in polynomial time. It also formally
poses the P ≠ NP question.
Section 34.3  shows how to relate problems via polynomial-time
“reductions.” It defines NP-completeness and sketches a proof that the
circuit-satisfiability problem is NP-complete. W ith one problem proven NP-
complete, Section 34.4  demonstrates how to prove other problems to be
NP-complete much more simply by the methodology of reductions. T o
illustrate this methodology , the section shows that two formula-satisfiability
problems are NP-complete. Section 34.5  proves a variety of other problems
to be NP-complete by using reductions. Y ou will probably find several of
these reductions to be quite creative, because they convert a problem in one
domain to a problem in a completely dif ferent domain.
34.1    Polynomial time
Since NP-completeness relies on notions of solving a problem and verifying
a certificate in polynomial time, let’ s first examine what it means for a
problem to be solvable in polynomial time.
Recall that we generally regard problems that have polynomial-time
solutions as tractable. Here are three reasons why:
1 . Although no reasonable person considers a problem that requires
Θ( n100) time to be tractable, few practical problems require time on
Page number: 1224
the order of such a high-degree polynomial. The polynomial-time
computable problems encountered in practice typically require
much less time. Experience has shown that once the first
polynomial-time algorithm for a problem has been discovered, more
ef ficient algorithms often follow . Even if the current best algorithm
for a problem has a running time of Θ( n100), an algorithm with a
much better running time will likely soon be discovered.
2 . For many reasonable models of computation, a problem that can be
solved in polynomial time in one model can be solved in polynomial
time in another . For example, the class of problems solvable in
polynomial time by the serial random-access machine used
throughout most of this book is the same as the class of problems
solvable in polynomial time on abstract T uring machines.2 It is also
the same as the class of problems solvable in polynomial time on a
parallel computer when the number of processors grows
polynomially with the input size.
3 . The class of polynomial-time solvable problems has nice closure
properties, since polynomials are closed under addition,
multiplication, and composition. For example, if the output of one
polynomial-time algorithm is fed into the input of another , the
composite algorithm is polynomial. Exercise 34.1-5 asks you to
show that if an algorithm makes a constant number of calls to
polynomial-time subroutines and performs an additional amount of
work that also takes polynomial time, then the running time of the
composite algorithm is polynomial.
Abstract pr oblems
T o understand the class of polynomial-time solvable problems, you must
first have a formal notion of what a “problem” is. W e define an abstract
problem  Q  to be a binary relation on a set I  of problem instances  and a set S
of problem solutions . For example, an instance for SHOR TEST -P A TH is a
triple consisting of a graph and two vertices. A solution is a sequence of
vertices in the graph, with perhaps the empty sequence denoting that no
path exists. The problem SHOR TEST -P A TH itself is the relation that
associates each instance of a graph and two vertices with a shortest path in
the graph that connects the two vertices. Since shortest paths are not
Page number: 1225
necessarily unique, a given problem instance may have more than one
solution.
This formulation of an abstract problem is more general than necessary
for our purposes. As we saw above, the theory of NP-completeness restricts
attention to decision problems : those having a yes/no solution. In this case,
we can view an abstract decision problem as a function that maps the
instance set I  to the solution set {0, 1}. For example, a decision problem
related to SHOR TEST -P A TH is the problem P A TH that we saw earlier . If i  =
〈 G, u, v , k〉  is an instance of P A TH, then P A TH( i ) = 1 (yes) if G  contains a
path from u  to v  with at most k  edges, and P A TH( i ) = 0 (no) otherwise.
Many abstract problems are not decision problems, but rather optimization
problems , which require some value to be minimized or maximized. As we
saw above, however , you can usually recast an optimization problem as a
decision problem that is no harder .
Encodings
In order for a computer program to solve an abstract problem, its problem
instances must appear in a way that the program understands. An encoding
of a set S  of abstract objects is a mapping e  from S  to the set of binary
strings.3 For example, we are all familiar with encoding the natural numbers
ℕ  = {0, 1, 2, 3, 4,…} as the strings {0, 1, 10, 1 1, 100,…}. Using this
encoding, e (17) = 10001. If you have looked at computer representations of
keyboard characters, you probably have seen the ASCII code, where, for
example, the encoding of A  is 01000001. Y ou can encode a compound
object as a binary string by combining the representations of its constituent
parts. Polygons, graphs, functions, ordered pairs, programs—all can be
encoded as binary strings.
Thus, a computer algorithm that “solves” some abstract decision
problem actually takes an encoding of a problem instance as input. The size
of an instance i  is just the length of its string, which we denote by | i |. W e
call a problem whose instance set is the set of binary strings a concrete
problem . W e say that an algorithm solves  a concrete problem in O ( T  ( n ))
time if, when it is provided a problem instance i  of length n  = | i |, the
algorithm can produce the solution in O ( T  ( n )) time.4 A concrete problem is
polynomial-time solvable , therefore, if there exists an algorithm to solve it
in O ( nk) time for some constant k .
Page number: 1226
W e can now formally define the complexity class  P  as the set of
concrete decision problems that are polynomial-time solvable.
Encodings map abstract problems to concrete problems. Given an
abstract decision problem Q  mapping an instance set I  to {0, 1}, an
encoding e  : I  → {0, 1}* can induce a related concrete decision problem,
which we denote by e ( Q ).5 If the solution to an abstract-problem instance i
∈  I  is Q ( i ) ∈  {0, 1}, then the solution to the concrete-problem instance e ( i )
∈  {0, 1}* is also Q ( i ). As a technicality , some binary strings might
represent no meaningful abstract-problem instance. For convenience,
assume that any such string maps arbitrarily to 0. Thus, the concrete
problem produces the same solutions as the abstract problem on binary-
string instances that represent the encodings of abstract-problem instances.
W e would like to extend the definition of polynomial-time solvability
from concrete problems to abstract problems by using encodings as the
bridge, ideally with the definition independent of any particular encoding.
That is, the ef ficiency of solving a problem should not depend on how the
problem is encoded. Unfortunately , it depends quite heavily on the
encoding. For example, suppose that the sole input to an algorithm is an
integer k , and suppose that the running time of the algorithm is Θ( k ). If the
integer k  is provided in unary —a string of k  1s—then the running time of
the algorithm is O ( n ) on length- n  inputs, which is polynomial time. If the
input k  is provided using the more natural binary representation, however ,
then the input length is n  = ⌊ lg k ⌋  + 1, so the size of the unary encoding is
exponential in the size of the binary encoding. W ith the binary
representation, the running time of the algorithm is Θ( k ) = Θ(2n), which is
exponential in the size of the input. Thus, depending on the encoding, the
algorithm runs in either polynomial or superpolynomial time.
The encoding of an abstract problem matters quite a bit to how we
understand polynomial time. W e cannot really talk about solving an abstract
problem without first specifying an encoding. Nevertheless, in practice, if
we rule out “expensive” encodings such as unary ones, the actual encoding
of a problem makes little dif ference to whether the problem can be solved
in polynomial time. For example, representing integers in base 3 instead of
binary has no ef fect on whether a problem is solvable in polynomial time,
since we can convert an integer represented in base 3 to an integer
represented in base 2 in polynomial time.
Page number: 1227
W e say that a function f  : {0, 1}* → {0, 1}* is polynomial-time
computable  if there exists a polynomial-time algorithm A  that, given any
input x  ∈  {0, 1}*, produces as output f  ( x ). For some set I  of problem
instances, we say that two encodings e1  and e2  are polynomially related  if
there exist two polynomial-time computable functions f12  and f21  such that
for any i  ∈  I , we have f12 ( e1 ( i )) = e2 ( i ) and f21 ( e2 ( i )) = e1 ( i ).6 That is, a
polynomial-time algorithm can compute the encoding e2 ( i ) from the
encoding e1 ( i ), and vice versa. If two encodings e1  and e2  of an abstract
problem are polynomially related, whether the problem is polynomial-time
solvable or not is independent of which encoding we use, as the following
lemma shows.
Lemma 34.1
Let Q  be an abstract decision problem on an instance set I , and let e1  and e2
be polynomially related encodings on I . Then, e1 ( Q ) ∈  P if and only if
e2 ( Q ) ∈  P .
Proof    W e need only prove the forward direction, since the backward
direction is symmetric. Suppose, therefore, that e1 ( Q ) can be solved in
O ( nk) time for some constant k . Furthermore, suppose that for any problem
instance i , the encoding e1 ( i ) can be computed from the encoding e2 ( i ) in
O ( nc) time for some constant c , where n  = | e2 ( i )|. T o solve problem e2 ( Q ) on
input e2 ( i ), first compute e1 ( i ) and then run the algorithm for e1 ( Q ) on e1 ( i ).
How long does this procedure take? Converting encodings takes O ( nc) time,
and therefore | e1 ( i )| = O ( nc), since the output of a serial computer cannot be
longer than its running time. Solving the problem on e1 ( i ) takes O (| e1 ( i )|k) =
O ( nck) time, which is polynomial since both c  and k  are constants.
▪
Thus, whether an abstract problem has its instances encoded in binary or
base 3 does not af fect its “complexity ,” that is, whether it is polynomial-
time solvable or not. If instances are encoded in unary , however , its
complexity may change. In order to be able to converse in an encoding-
independent fashion, we generally assume that problem instances are
encoded in any reasonable, concise fashion, unless we specifically say
Page number: 1228
otherwise. T o be precise, we assume that the encoding of an integer is
polynomially related to its binary representation, and that the encoding of a
finite set is polynomially related to its encoding as a list of its elements,
enclosed in braces and separated by commas. (ASCII is one such encoding
scheme.) W ith such a “standard” encoding in hand, we can derive
reasonable encodings of other mathematical objects, such as tuples, graphs,
and formulas. T o denote the standard encoding of an object, we enclose the
object in angle brackets. Thus, 〈 G〉  denotes the standard encoding of a graph
G .
As long as the encoding implicitly used is polynomially related to this
standard encoding, we can talk directly about abstract problems without
reference to any particular encoding, knowing that the choice of encoding
has no ef fect on whether the abstract problem is polynomial-time solvable.
From now on, we will generally assume that all problem instances are
binary strings encoded using the standard encoding, unless we explicitly
specify the contrary . W e’ll also typically neglect the distinction between
abstract and concrete problems. Y ou should watch out for problems that
arise in practice, however , in which a standard encoding is not obvious and
the encoding does make a dif ference.
A formal-language framework
By focusing on decision problems, we can take advantage of the machinery
of formal-language theory . Let’ s review some definitions from that theory .
An alphabet  Σ is a finite set of symbols. A language  L  over Σ is any set of
strings made up of symbols from Σ. For example, if Σ = {0, 1}, the set L  =
{10, 1 1, 101, 1 1 1, 101 1, 1 101, 10001,…} is the language of binary
representations of prime numbers. W e denote the empty string  by ε , the
empty language  by Ø, and the language of all strings over Σ by Σ*. For
example, if Σ = {0, 1}, then Σ* = { ε , 0, 1, 00, 01, 10, 1 1, 000,…} is the set
of all binary strings. Every language L  over Σ is a subset of Σ*.
Languages support a variety of operations. Set-theoretic operations, such
as union  and intersection , follow directly from the set-theoretic definitions.
W e define the complement  of a language L  by L  = Σ* − L . The
concatenation  L1 L2  of two languages L1  and L2  is the language
L  = { x1 x2  : x1  ∈  L1  and x2  ∈  L2 }.
Page number: 1229
The closure  or Kleene star  of a language L  is the language
L * = { ε } ∪  L  ∪  L2 ∪  L3 ∪  …,
where Lk is the language obtained by concatenating L  to itself k  times.
From the point of view of language theory , the set of instances for any
decision problem Q  is simply the set Σ*, where Σ = {0, 1}. Since Q  is
entirely characterized by those problem instances that produce a 1 (yes)
answer , we can view Q  as a language L  over Σ = {0, 1}, where
L  = { x  ∈  Σ* : Q ( x ) = 1}.
For example, the decision problem P A TH has the corresponding language
P A TH = { 〈 G, u, v , k〉 : G  = ( V , E ) is an undirected graph,
u, v  ∈  V ,
k  ≥ 0 is an integer , and
G  contains a path from u  to v  with at most k  edges}.
(Where convenient, we’ll sometimes use the same name—P A TH in this
case—to refer to both a decision problem and its corresponding language.)
The formal-language framework allows us to express concisely the
relation between decision problems and algorithms that solve them. W e say
that an algorithm A accepts  a string x  ∈  {0, 1}* if, given input x , the
algorithm’ s output A ( x ) is 1. The language accepted  by an algorithm A  is
the set of strings L  = { x  ∈  {0, 1}* : A ( x ) = 1}, that is, the set of strings that
the algorithm accepts. An algorithm A rejects  a string x  if A ( x ) = 0.
Even if language L  is accepted by an algorithm A , the algorithm does not
necessarily reject a string x  ∉  L  provided as input to it. For example, the
algorithm might loop forever . A language L  is decided  by an algorithm A  if
every binary string in L  is accepted by A  and every binary string not in L  is
rejected by A . A language L  is accepted in polynomial time  by an algorithm
A  if it is accepted by A  and if in addition there exists a constant k  such that
for any length- n  string x  ∈  L , algorithm A  accepts x  in O ( nk) time. A
language L  is decided in polynomial time  by an algorithm A  if there exists a
constant k  such that for any length- n  string x  ∈  {0, 1}*, the algorithm
correctly decides whether x  ∈  L  in O ( nk) time. Thus, to accept a language,
an algorithm need only produce an answer when provided a string in L , but
to decide a language, it must correctly accept or reject every string in {0,
1}*.
Page number: 1230
As an example, the language P A TH can be accepted in polynomial time.
One polynomial-time accepting algorithm verifies that G  encodes an
undirected graph, verifies that u  and v  are vertices in G , uses breadth-first
search to compute a path from u  to v  in G  with the fewest edges, and then
compares the number of edges on the path obtained with k . If G  encodes an
undirected graph and the path found from u  to v  has at most k  edges, the
algorithm outputs 1 and halts. Otherwise, the algorithm runs forever . This
algorithm does not decide P A TH, however , since it does not explicitly
output 0 for instances in which a shortest path has more than k  edges. A
decision algorithm for P A TH must explicitly reject binary strings that do not
belong to P A TH. For a decision problem such as P A TH, such a decision
algorithm is straightforward to design: instead of running forever when
there is not a path from u  to v  with at most k  edges, it outputs 0 and halts. (It
must also output 0 and halt if the input encoding is faulty .) For other
problems, such as T uring’ s Halting Problem, there exists an accepting
algorithm, but no decision algorithm exists.
W e can informally define a complexity class  as a set of languages,
membership in which is determined by a complexity measure , such as
running time, of an algorithm that determines whether a given string x
belongs to language L . The actual definition of a complexity class is
somewhat more technical.7
Using this language-theoretic framework, we can provide an alternative
definition of the complexity class P:
P = { L  ⊆  {0, 1}*: there exists an algorithm A  that decides L  in polynomial time}.
In fact, as the following theorem shows, P is also the class of languages that
can be accepted in polynomial time.
Theorem 34.2
P = { L  : L  is accepted by a polynomial-time algorithm}.
Proof  Because the class of languages decided by polynomial-time
algorithms is a subset of the class of languages accepted by polynomial-
time algorithms, we need only show that if L  is accepted by a polynomial-
time algorithm, it is decided by a polynomial-time algorithm. Let L  be the
language accepted by some polynomial-time algorithm A . W e use a classic
“simulation” ar gument to construct another polynomial-time algorithm A ′
Page number: 1231
that decides L . Because A  accepts L  in O ( nk) time for some constant k , there
also exists a constant c  such that A  accepts L  in at most cnk steps. For any
input string x , the algorithm A ′ simulates cnk steps of A . After simulating
cnk steps, algorithm A ′ inspects the behavior of A . If A  has accepted x , then
A ′ accepts x  by outputting a 1. If A  has not accepted x , then A ′ rejects x  by
outputting a 0. The overhead of A ′ simulating A  does not increase the
running time by more than a polynomial factor , and thus A ′ is a polynomial-
time algorithm that decides L .
▪
The proof of Theorem 34.2 is nonconstructive. For a given language L
∈  P , we may not actually know a bound on the running time for the
algorithm A  that accepts L . Nevertheless, we know that such a bound exists,
and therefore, that an algorithm A ′ exists that can check the bound, even
though we may not be able to find the algorithm A ′ easily .
Exer cises
34.1-1
Define the optimization problem LONGEST -P A TH-LENGTH as the
relation that associates each instance of an undirected graph and two
vertices with the number of edges in a longest simple path between the two
vertices. Define the decision problem LONGEST -P A TH = { 〈 G, u, v , k〉  : G  =
( V , E ) is an undirected graph, u, v  ∈  V , k  ≥ 0 is an integer , and there exists a
simple path from u  to v  in G  consisting of at least k  edges}. Show that the
optimization problem LONGEST -P A TH-LENGTH can be solved in
polynomial time if and only if LONGEST -P A TH ∈  P .
34.1-2
Give a formal definition for the problem of finding the longest simple cycle
in an undirected graph. Give a related decision problem. Give the language
corresponding to the decision problem.
34.1-3
Give a formal encoding of directed graphs as binary strings using an
adjacency-matrix representation. Do the same using an adjacency-list
representation. Ar gue that the two representations are polynomially related.
Page number: 1232
34.1-4
Is the dynamic-programming algorithm for the 0-1 knapsack problem that is
asked for in Exercise 15.2-2 a polynomial-time algorithm? Explain your
answer .
34.1-5
Show that if an algorithm makes at most a constant number of calls to
polynomial-time subroutines and performs an additional amount of work
that also takes polynomial time, then it runs in polynomial time. Also show
that a polynomial number of calls to polynomial-time subroutines may
result in an exponential-time algorithm.
34.1-6
Show that the class P , viewed as a set of languages, is closed under union,
intersection, concatenation, complement, and Kleene star . That is, if L1 , L2
∈  P , then L1  ∪  L2  ∈  P , L1  ∩ L2  ∈  P , L1 L2  ∈  P , L1  ∈  P , and 
 .
34.2    Polynomial-time verification
Now , let’ s look at algorithms that verify membership in languages. For
example, suppose that for a given instance 〈 G, u, v , k〉  of the decision
problem P A TH, you are also given a path p  from u  to v . Y ou can check
whether p  is a path in G  and whether the length of p  is at most k , and if so,
you can view p  as a “certificate” that the instance indeed belongs to P A TH.
For the decision problem P A TH, this certificate doesn’ t seem to buy much.
After all, P A TH belongs to P—in fact, you can solve P A TH in linear time—
and so verifying membership from a given certificate takes as long as
solving the problem from scratch. Instead, let’ s examine a problem for
which we know of no polynomial-time decision algorithm and yet, given a
certificate, verification is easy .
Hamiltonian cycles
The problem of finding a hamiltonian cycle in an undirected graph has been
studied for over a hundred years. Formally , a hamiltonian cycle  of an
undirected graph G  = ( V , E ) is a simple cycle that contains each vertex in V .
A graph that contains a hamiltonian cycle is said to be hamiltonian , and
Page number: 1233
otherwise, it is nonhamiltonian . The name honors W . R. Hamilton, who
described a mathematical game on the dodecahedron ( Figure 34.2(a) ) in
which one player sticks five pins in any five consecutive vertices and the
other player must complete the path to form a cycle containing all the
vertices.8 The dodecahedron is hamiltonian, and Figure 34.2(a)  shows one
hamiltonian cycle. Not all graphs are hamiltonian, however . For example,
Figure 34.2(b)  shows a bipartite graph with an odd number of vertices.
Exercise 34.2-2 asks you to show that all such graphs are nonhamiltonian.
Here is how to define the hamiltonian-cycle problem , “Does a graph G
have a hamiltonian cycle?” as a formal language:
HAM-CYCLE = { 〈 G〉  : G  is a hamiltonian graph}.
How might an algorithm decide the language HAM-CYCLE? Given a
problem instance 〈 G〉 , one possible decision algorithm lists all permutations
of the vertices of G  and then checks each permutation to see whether it is a
hamiltonian cycle. What is the running time of this algorithm? It depends
on the encoding of the graph G . Let’ s say that G  is encoded as its adjacency
matrix. If the adjacency matrix contains n  entries, so that the length of the
encoding of G  equals n , then the number m  of vertices in the graph is 
. There are m ! possible permutations of the vertices, and therefore the
running time is 
 , which is not O ( nk) for any
constant k . Thus, this naive algorithm does not run in polynomial time. In
fact, the hamiltonian-cycle problem is NP-complete, as we’ll prove in
Section 34.5 .
Page number: 1234
Figur e 34.2 (a)  A graph representing the vertices, edges, and faces of a dodecahedron, with a
hamiltonian cycle shown by edges highlighted in blue. (b)  A bipartite graph with an odd number of
vertices. Any such graph is nonhamiltonian.
V erification algorithms
Consider a slightly easier problem. Suppose that a friend tells you that a
given graph G  is hamiltonian, and then the friend of fers to prove it by
giving you the vertices in order along the hamiltonian cycle. It would
certainly be easy enough to verify the proof: simply verify that the provided
cycle is hamiltonian by checking whether it is a permutation of the vertices
of V  and whether each of the consecutive edges along the cycle actually
exists in the graph. Y ou could certainly implement this verification
algorithm to run in O ( n2) time, where n  is the length of the encoding of G .
Thus, a proof that a hamiltonian cycle exists in a graph can be verified in
polynomial time.
W e define a verification algorithm  as being a two-ar gument algorithm
A , where one ar gument is an ordinary input string x  and the other is a binary
string y  called a certificate . A two-ar gument algorithm A verifies  an input
string x  if there exists a certificate y  such that A ( x, y ) = 1. The language
verified  by a verification algorithm A  is
L  = { x  ∈  {0, 1}* : there exists y  ∈  {0, 1}* such that A ( x, y ) = 1}.
Page number: 1235
Think of an algorithm A  as verifying a language L  if, for any string x  ∈
L , there exists a certificate y  that A  can use to prove that x  ∈  L . Moreover ,
for any string x  ∉  L , there must be no certificate proving that x  ∈  L . For
example, in the hamiltonian-cycle problem, the certificate is the list of
vertices in some hamiltonian cycle. If a graph is hamiltonian, the
hamiltonian cycle itself of fers enough information to verify that the graph is
indeed hamiltonian. Conversely , if a graph is not hamiltonian, there can be
no list of vertices that fools the verification algorithm into believing that the
graph is hamiltonian, since the verification algorithm carefully checks the
so-called cycle to be sure.
The complexity class NP
The complexity class  NP  is the class of languages that can be verified by a
polynomial-time algorithm.9 More precisely , a language L  belongs to NP if
and only if there exist a two-input polynomial-time algorithm A  and a
constant c  such that
L  = { x  ∈  {0, 1}*:there exists a certificate y  with | y | = O (| x |c)
such that A ( x , y ) = 1}.
W e say that algorithm A verifies  language L in polynomial time .
From our earlier discussion about the hamiltonian-cycle problem, you
can see that HAM-CYCLE ∈  NP . (It is always nice to know that an
important set is nonempty .) Moreover , if L  ∈  P , then L  ∈  NP , since if there
is a polynomial-time algorithm to decide L , the algorithm can be converted
to a two-ar gument verification algorithm that simply ignores any certificate
and accepts exactly those input strings it determines to belong to L . Thus, P
⊆  NP .
That leaves the question of whether P = NP . A definitive answer is
unknown, but most researchers believe that P and NP are not the same
class. Think of the class P as consisting of problems that can be solved
quickly and the class NP as consisting of problems for which a solution can
be verified quickly . Y ou may have learned from experience that it is often
more dif ficult to solve a problem from scratch than to verify a clearly
presented solution, especially when working under time constraints.
Theoretical computer scientists generally believe that this analogy extends
Page number: 1236
to the classes P and NP , and thus that NP includes languages that do not
belong to P .
Figur e 34.3  Four possibilities for relationships among complexity classes. In each diagram, one
region enclosing another indicates a proper -subset relation. (a)  P = NP = co-NP . Most researchers
regard this possibility as the most unlikely . (b)  If NP is closed under complement, then NP = co-NP ,
but it need not be the case that P = NP . (c)  P = NP ∩ co-NP , but NP is not closed under complement.
(d)  NP ≠ co-NP and P ≠ NP ∩ co-NP . Most researchers regard this possibility as the most likely .
There is more compelling, though not conclusive, evidence that P ≠ NP
—the existence of languages that are “NP-complete.” Section 34.3  will
study this class.
Many other fundamental questions beyond the P ≠ NP question remain
unresolved. Figure 34.3  shows some possible scenarios. Despite much work
by many researchers, no one even knows whether the class NP is closed
under complement. That is, does L  ∈  NP imply L  ∈  NP? W e define the
complexity class  co-NP  as the set of languages L  such that L  ∈  NP , so that
the question of whether NP is closed under complement is also whether NP
= co-NP . Since P is closed under complement (Exercise 34.1-6), it follows
from Exercise 34.2-9 (P ⊆  co-NP) that P ⊆  NP ∩ co-NP . Once again,
however , no one knows whether P = NP ∩ co-NP or whether there is some
language in (NP ∩ co-NP) − P .
Thus our understanding of the precise relationship between P and NP is
woefully incomplete. Nevertheless, even though we might not be able to
prove that a particular problem is intractable, if we can prove that it is NP-
complete, then we have gained valuable information about it.
Page number: 1237
Exer cises
34.2-1
Consider the language GRAPH-ISOMORPHISM = { 〈 G1 , G2〉  : G1  and G2
are isomorphic graphs}. Prove that GRAPH-ISOMORPHISM ∈  NP by
describing a polynomial-time algorithm to verify the language.
34.2-2
Prove that if G  is an undirected bipartite graph with an odd number of
vertices, then G  is nonhamiltonian.
34.2-3
Show that if HAM-CYCLE ∈  P , then the problem of listing the vertices of
a hamiltonian cycle, in order , is polynomial-time solvable.
34.2-4
Prove that the class NP of languages is closed under union, intersection,
concatenation, and Kleene star . Discuss the closure of NP under
complement.
34.2-5
Show that any language in NP can be decided by an algorithm with a
running time of 
  for some constant k .
34.2-6
A hamiltonian path  in a graph is a simple path that visits every vertex
exactly once. Show that the language HAM-P A TH = { 〈 G, u, v 〉  : there is a
hamiltonian path from u  to v  in graph G } belongs to NP .
34.2-7
Show that the hamiltonian-path problem from Exercise 34.2-6 can be
solved in polynomial time on directed acyclic graphs. Give an ef ficient
algorithm for the problem.
34.2-8
Let ϕ  be a boolean formula constructed from the boolean input variables x1 ,
x2 , … , xk , negations (¬), ANDs ( ∧ ), ORs ( ∨ ), and parentheses. The
formula ϕ  is a tautology  if it evaluates to 1 for every assignment of 1 and 0
Page number: 1238
to the input variables. Define T AUT OLOGY as the language of boolean
formulas that are tautologies. Show that T AUT OLOGY ∈  co-NP .
34.2-9
Prove that P ⊆  co-NP .
34.2-10
Prove that if NP ≠ co-NP , then P ≠ NP .
34.2-1 1
Let G  be a connected, undirected graph with at least three vertices, and let
G3 be the graph obtained by connecting all pairs of vertices that are
connected by a path in G  of length at most 3. Prove that G3 is hamiltonian.
( Hint:  Construct a spanning tree for G , and use an inductive ar gument.)
34.3    NP-completeness and r educibility
Perhaps the most compelling reason why theoretical computer scientists
believe that P ≠ NP comes from the existence of the class of NP-complete
problems. This class has the intriguing property that if any  NP-complete
problem can be solved in polynomial time, then every  problem in NP has a
polynomial-time solution, that is, P = NP . Despite decades of study , though,
no polynomial-time algorithm has ever been discovered for any NP-
complete problem.
The language HAM-CYCLE is one NP-complete problem. If there were
an algorithm to decide HAM-CYCLE in polynomial time, then every
problem in NP could be solved in polynomial time. The NP-complete
languages are, in a sense, the “hardest” languages in NP . In fact, if NP − P
turns out to be nonempty , we will be able to say with certainty that HAM-
CYCLE ∈  NP − P .
This section starts by showing how to compare the relative “hardness”
of languages using a precise notion called “polynomial-time reducibility .” It
then formally defines the NP-complete languages, finishing by sketching a
proof that one such language, called CIRCUIT -SA T , is NP-complete.
Sections 34.4  and 34.5  will use the notion of reducibility to show that many
other problems are NP-complete.
Page number: 1239
Reducibility
One way that sometimes works for solving a problem is to recast it as a
dif ferent problem. W e call that strategy “reducing” one problem to another .
Think of a problem Q  as being reducible to another problem Q ′ if any
instance of Q  can be recast as an instance of Q ′, and the solution to the
instance of Q ′ provides a solution to the instance of Q . For example, the
problem of solving linear equations in an indeterminate x  reduces to the
problem of solving quadratic equations. Given a linear -equation instance ax
+ b  = 0 (with solution x  = − b / a ), you can transform it to the quadratic
equation ax2 + bx  + 0 = 0. This quadratic equation has the solutions 
, where c  = 0, so that 
 . The solutions
are then x  = (− b  + b )/2 a  = 0 and x  = (− b  − b )/2 a  = − b / a , thereby providing a
solution to ax  + b  = 0. Thus, if a problem Q  reduces to another problem Q ′,
then Q  is, in a sense, “no harder to solve” than Q ′.
Figur e 34.4  A function f  that reduces language L 1  to language L 2 . For any input x  ∈  {0, 1}*, the
question of whether x  ∈  L 1  has the same answer as the question of whether f  ( x ) ∈  L 2 .
Returning to our formal-language framework for decision problems, we
say that a language L1  is polynomial-time reducible  to a language L2 ,
written L1  ≤P  L2 , if there exists a polynomial-time computable function f  :
{0, 1}* → {0, 1}* such that for all x  ∈  {0, 1}*,
W e call the function f  the reduction function , and a polynomial-time
algorithm F  that computes f  is a reduction algorithm .
Page number: 1240
Figure 34.4  illustrates the idea of a reduction from a language L1  to
another language L2 . Each language is a subset of {0, 1}*. The reduction
function f  provides a mapping such that if x  ∈  L1 , then f  ( x ) ∈  L2 .
Moreover , if x  ∉  L1 , then f  ( x ) ∉  L2 . Thus, the reduction function maps any
instance x  of the decision problem represented by the language L1  to an
instance f  ( x ) of the problem represented by L2 . Providing an answer to
whether f  ( x ) ∈  L2  directly provides the answer to whether x  ∈  L1 . If, in
addition, f  can be computed in polynomial time, it is a polynomial-time
reduction function.
Polynomial-time reductions give us a powerful tool for proving that
various languages belong to P .
Lemma 34.3
If L1 , L2  ⊆  {0, 1}* are languages such that L1  ≤P  L2 , then L2  ∈  P implies L1
∈  P .
Figur e 34.5  The proof of Lemma 34.3. The algorithm F  is a reduction algorithm that computes the
reduction function f  from L 1  to L 2  in polynomial time, and A 2  is a polynomial-time algorithm that
decides L 2 . Algorithm A 1  decides whether x  ∈  L 1  by using F  to transform any input x  into f  ( x ) and
then using A 2  to decide whether f  ( x ) ∈  L 2 .
Proof    Let A2  be a polynomial-time algorithm that decides L2 , and let F  be
a polynomial-time reduction algorithm that computes the reduction function
f . W e show how to construct a polynomial-time algorithm A1  that decides
L1 .
Figure 34.5  illustrates how we construct A1 . For a given input x  ∈  {0,
1}*, algorithm A1  uses F  to transform x  into f  ( x ), and then it uses A2  to test
whether f  ( x ) ∈  L2 . Algorithm A1  takes the output from algorithm A2  and
produces that answer as its own output.
Page number: 1241
The correctness of A1  follows from condition (34.1). The algorithm runs
in polynomial time, since both F  and A2  run in polynomial time (see
Exercise 34.1-5).
▪
NP-completeness
Polynomial-time reductions allow us to formally show that one problem is
at least as hard as another , to within a polynomial-time factor . That is, if L1
≤P  L2 , then L1  is not more than a polynomial factor harder than L2 , which is
why the “less than or equal to” notation for reduction is mnemonic. W e can
now define the set of NP-complete languages, which are the hardest
problems in NP .
A language L  ⊆  {0, 1}* is NP-complete  if
1 . L  ∈  NP , and
2 . L ′ ≤P  L  for every L ′ ∈  NP .
If a language L  satisfies property 2, but not necessarily property 1, we say
that L  is NP-hard . W e also define NPC to be the class of NP-complete
languages.
As the following theorem shows, NP-completeness is at the crux of
deciding whether P is in fact equal to NP .
Theorem 34.4
If any NP-complete problem is polynomial-time solvable, then P = NP .
Equivalently , if any problem in NP is not polynomial-time solvable, then no
NP-complete problem is polynomial-time solvable.
Figur e 34.6  How most theoretical computer scientists view the relationships among P , NP , and NPC.
Both P and NPC are wholly contained within NP , and P ∩ NPC = Ø.
Page number: 1242
Proof    Suppose that L  ∈  P and also that L  ∈  NPC. For any L ′ ∈  NP , we
have L ′ ≤P  L  by property 2 of the definition of NP-completeness. Thus, by
Lemma 34.3, we also have that L ′ ∈  P , which proves the first statement of
the theorem.
T o prove the second statement, consider the contrapositive of the first
statement: if P ≠ NP , then there does not exist an NP-complete problem that
is polynomial-time solvable. But P ≠ NP means that there is some problem
in NP that is not polynomial-time solvable, and hence the second statement
is the contrapositive of the first statement.
▪
It is for this reason that research into the P ≠ NP question centers around
the NP-complete problems. Most theoretical computer scientists believe
that P ≠ NP , which leads to the relationships among P , NP , and NPC shown
in Figure 34.6 . For all we know , however , someone may yet come up with a
polynomial-time algorithm for an NP-complete problem, thus proving that
P = NP . Nevertheless, since no polynomial-time algorithm for any NP-
complete problem has yet been discovered, a proof that a problem is NP-
complete provides excellent evidence that it is intractable.
Cir cuit satisfiability
W e have defined the notion of an NP-complete problem, but up to this
point, we have not actually proved that any problem is NP-complete. Once
we prove that at least one problem is NP-complete, polynomial-time
reducibility becomes a tool to prove other problems to be NP-complete.
Thus, we now focus on demonstrating the existence of an NP-complete
problem: the circuit-satisfiability problem.
Unfortunately , the formal proof that the circuit-satisfiability problem is
NP-complete requires technical detail beyond the scope of this text. Instead,
we’ll informally describe a proof that relies on a basic understanding of
boolean combinational circuits.
Page number: 1243
Figur e 34.7  Three basic logic gates, with binary inputs and outputs. Under each gate is the truth table
that describes the gate’ s operation. (a)  The NOT gate. (b)  The AND gate. (c)  The OR gate.
Boolean combinational circuits are built from boolean combinational
elements that are interconnected by wires. A boolean combinational
element  is any circuit element that has a constant number of boolean inputs
and outputs and that performs a well-defined function. Boolean values are
drawn from the set {0, 1}, where 0 represents F ALSE  and 1 represents TRUE .
The boolean combinational elements appearing in the circuit-
satisfiability problem compute simple boolean functions, and they are
known as logic gates . Figure 34.7  shows the three basic logic gates used in
the circuit-satisfiability problem: the NOT gate  (or inverter ), the AND gate ,
and the OR gate . The NOT gate takes a single binary input  x , whose value
is either 0 or 1, and produces a binary output  z  whose value is opposite that
of the input value. Each of the other two gates takes two binary inputs x  and
y  and produces a single binary output z .
The operation of each gate, or of any boolean combinational element, is
defined by a truth table , shown under each gate in Figure 34.7 . A truth
table gives the outputs of the combinational element for each possible
setting of the inputs. For example, the truth table for the OR gate says that
when the inputs are x  = 0 and y  = 1, the output value is z  = 1. The symbol ¬
denotes the NOT function, ∧  denotes the AND function, and ∨  denotes the
OR function. Thus, for example, 0 ∨  1 = 1.
AND and OR gates are not limited to just two inputs. An AND gate’ s
output is 1 if all of its inputs are 1, and its output is 0 otherwise. An OR
gate’ s output is 1 if any of its inputs are 1, and its output is 0 otherwise.
A boolean combinational circuit  consists of one or more boolean
combinational elements interconnected by wires . A wire can connect the
Page number: 1244
output of one element to the input of another , so that the output value of the
first element becomes an input value of the second. Figure 34.8  shows two
similar boolean combinational circuits, dif fering in only one gate. Part (a)
of the figure also shows the values on the individual wires, given the input
〈 x1  = 1, x2  = 1, x3  = 0 〉 . Although a single wire may have no more than one
combinational-element output connected to it, it can feed several element
inputs. The number of element inputs fed by a wire is called the fan-out  of
the wire. If no element output is connected to a wire, the wire is a circuit
input , accepting input values from an external source. If no element input is
connected to a wire, the wire is a circuit output , providing the results of the
circuit’ s computation to the outside world. (An internal wire can also fan
out to a circuit output.) For the purpose of defining the circuit-satisfiability
problem, we limit the number of circuit outputs to 1, though in actual
hardware design, a boolean combinational circuit may have multiple
outputs.
Figur e 34.8  T wo instances of the circuit-satisfiability problem. (a)  The assignment 〈 x 1  = 1, x 2  = 1,
x 3  = 0 〉  to the inputs of this circuit causes the output of the circuit to be 1. The circuit is therefore
satisfiable. (b)  No assignment to the inputs of this circuit can cause the output of the circuit to be 1.
The circuit is therefore unsatisfiable.
Boolean combinational circuits contain no cycles. In other words, for a
given combinational circuit, imagine a directed graph G  = ( V , E ) with one
vertex for each combinational element and with k  directed edges for each
wire whose fan-out is k , where the graph contains a directed edge ( u , v ) if a
wire connects the output of element u  to an input of element v . Then G  must
be acyclic.
Page number: 1245
A truth assignment  for a boolean combinational circuit is a set of
boolean input values. W e say that a 1-output boolean combinational circuit
is satisfiable  if it has a satisfying assignment : a truth assignment that
causes the output of the circuit to be 1. For example, the circuit in Figure
34.8(a)  has the satisfying assignment 〈 x1  = 1, x2  = 1, x3  = 0 〉 , and so it is
satisfiable. As Exercise 34.3-1 asks you to show , no assignment of values to
x1 , x2 , and x3  causes the circuit in Figure 34.8(b)  to produce a 1 output.
Since it always produces 0, it is unsatisfiable.
The circuit-satisfiability problem  is, “Given a boolean combinational
circuit composed of AND, OR, and NOT gates, is it satisfiable?” In order to
pose this question formally , however , we must agree on a standard encoding
for circuits. The size  of a boolean combinational circuit is the number of
boolean combinational elements plus the number of wires in the circuit. W e
could devise a graph-like encoding that maps any given circuit C  into a
binary string 〈 C〉  whose length is polynomial in the size of the circuit itself.
As a formal language, we can therefore define
CIRCUIT -SA T = { 〈 C〉  : C  is a satisfiable boolean combinational circuit}.
The circuit-satisfiability problem arises in the area of computer -aided
hardware optimization. If a subcircuit always produces 0, that subcircuit is
unnecessary: the designer can replace it by a simpler subcircuit that omits
all logic gates and provides the constant 0 value as its output. Y ou can see
the value in having a polynomial-time algorithm for this problem.
Given a circuit C , you can determine whether it is satisfiable by simply
checking all possible assignments to the inputs. Unfortunately , if the circuit
has k  inputs, then you would have to check up to 2k possible assignments.
When the size of C  is polynomial in k , checking all possible assignments to
the inputs takes Ω(2k) time, which is superpolynomial in the size of the
circuit.10 In fact, as we have claimed, there is strong evidence that no
polynomial-time algorithm exists that solves the circuit-satisfiability
problem because circuit satisfiability is NP-complete. W e break the proof of
this fact into two parts, based on the two parts of the definition of NP-
completeness.
Lemma 34.5
The circuit-satisfiability problem belongs to the class NP .
Page number: 1246
Proof    W e provide a two-input, polynomial-time algorithm A  that can
verify CIRCUIT -SA T . One of the inputs to A  is (a standard encoding of) a
boolean combinational circuit C . The other input is a certificate
corresponding to an assignment of a boolean value to each of the wires in
C . (See Exercise 34.3-4 for a smaller certificate.)
The algorithm A  works as follows. For each logic gate in the circuit, it
checks that the value provided by the certificate on the output wire is
correctly computed as a function of the values on the input wires. Then, if
the output of the entire circuit is 1, algorithm A  outputs 1, since the values
assigned to the inputs of C  provide a satisfying assignment. Otherwise, A
outputs 0.
Whenever a satisfiable circuit C  is input to algorithm A , there exists a
certificate whose length is polynomial in the size of C  and that causes A  to
output a 1. Whenever an unsatisfiable circuit is input, no certificate can fool
A  into believing that the circuit is satisfiable. Algorithm A  runs in
polynomial time, and with a good implementation, linear time suf fices.
Thus, CIRCUIT -SA T is verifiable in polynomial time, and CIRCUIT -SA T
∈  NP .
▪
The second part of proving that CIRCUIT -SA T is NP-complete is to
show that the language is NP-hard: that every  language in NP is
polynomial-time reducible to CIRCUIT -SA T . The actual proof of this fact is
full of technical intricacies, and so instead we’ll sketch the proof based on
some understanding of the workings of computer hardware.
A computer program is stored in the computer ’ s memory as a sequence
of instructions. A typical instruction encodes an operation to be performed,
addresses of operands in memory , and an address where the result is to be
stored. A special memory location, called the program counter , keeps track
of which instruction is to be executed next. The program counter
automatically increments when each instruction is fetched, thereby causing
the computer to execute instructions sequentially . Certain instructions can
cause a value to be written to the program counter , however , which alters
the normal sequential execution and allows the computer to loop and
perform conditional branches.
At any point while a program executes, the computer ’ s memory holds
the entire state of the computation. (Consider the memory to include the
Page number: 1247
program itself, the program counter , working storage, and any of the
various bits of state that a computer maintains for bookkeeping.) W e call
any particular state of computer memory a configuration . When an
instruction executes, it transforms the configuration. Think of an instruction
as mapping one configuration to another . The computer hardware that
accomplishes this mapping can be implemented as a boolean combinational
circuit, which we denote by M  in the proof of the following lemma.
Lemma 34.6
The circuit-satisfiability problem is NP-hard.
Proof    Let L  be any language in NP . W e’ll describe a polynomial-time
algorithm F  computing a reduction function f  that maps every binary string
x  to a circuit C  = f  ( x ) such that x  ∈  L  if and only if C  ∈  CIRCUIT -SA T .
Since L  ∈  NP , there must exist an algorithm A  that verifies L  in
polynomial time. The algorithm F  that we construct uses the two-input
algorithm A  to compute the reduction function f .
Let T  ( n ) denote the worst-case running time of algorithm A  on length- n
input strings, and let k  ≥ 1 be a constant such that T  ( n ) = O ( nk) and the
length of the certificate is O ( nk). (The running time of A  is actually a
polynomial in the total input size, which includes both an input string and a
certificate, but since the length of the certificate is polynomial in the length
n  of the input string, the running time is polynomial in n .)
Page number: 1248
Figur e 34.9  The sequence of configurations produced by an algorithm A  running on an input x  and
certificate y . Each configuration represents the state of the computer for one step of the computation
and, besides A , x , and y , includes the program counter (PC), auxiliary machine state, and working
storage. Except for the certificate y , the initial configuration c 0  is constant. A boolean combinational
circuit M  maps each configuration to the next configuration. The output is a distinguished bit in the
working storage.
The basic idea of the proof is to represent the computation of A  as a
sequence of configurations. As Figure 34.9  illustrates, consider each
configuration as comprising a few parts: the program for A , the program
counter and auxiliary machine state, the input x , the certificate y , and
working storage. The combinational circuit M , which implements the
computer hardware, maps each configuration ci  to the next configuration
Page number: 1249
ci +1 , starting from the initial configuration c0 . Algorithm A  writes its output
—0 or 1—to some designated location by the time it finishes executing.
After A  halts, the output value never changes. Thus, if the algorithm runs
for at most T  ( n ) steps, the output appears as one of the bits in cT ( n ).
The reduction algorithm F  constructs a single combinational circuit that
computes all configurations produced by a given initial configuration. The
idea is to paste together T  ( n ) copies of the circuit M . The output of the i th
circuit, which produces configuration ci , feeds directly into the input of the
( i  +1)st circuit. Thus, the configurations, rather than being stored in the
computer ’ s memory , simply reside as values on the wires connecting copies
of M .
Recall what the polynomial-time reduction algorithm F  must do. Given
an input x , it must compute a circuit C  = f  ( x ) that is satisfiable if and only if
there exists a certificate y  such that A ( x , y ) = 1. When F  obtains an input x ,
it first computes n  = | x | and constructs a combinational circuit C ′ consisting
of T  ( n ) copies of M . The input to C ′ is an initial configuration
corresponding to a computation on A ( x , y ), and the output is the
configuration cT ( n ).
Algorithm F  modifies circuit C ′ slightly to construct the circuit C  = f  ( x ).
First, it wires the inputs to C ′ corresponding to the program for A , the initial
program counter , the input x , and the initial state of memory directly to
these known values. Thus, the only remaining inputs to the circuit
correspond to the certificate y . Second, it ignores all outputs from C ′, except
for the one bit of cT ( n ) corresponding to the output of A . This circuit C , so
constructed, computes C ( y ) = A ( x , y ) for any input y  of length O ( nk). The
reduction algorithm F , when provided an input string x , computes such a
circuit C  and outputs it.
W e need to prove two properties. First, we must show that F  correctly
computes a reduction function f . That is, we must show that C  is satisfiable
if and only if there exists a certificate y  such that A ( x , y ) = 1. Second, we
must show that F  runs in polynomial time.
T o show that F  correctly computes a reduction function, suppose that
there exists a certificate y  of length O ( nk) such that A ( x , y ) = 1. Then, upon
applying the bits of y  to the inputs of C , the output of C  is C ( y ) = A ( x , y ) =
1. Thus, if a certificate exists, then C  is satisfiable. For the other direction,
suppose that C  is satisfiable. Hence, there exists an input y  to C  such that
Page number: 1250
C ( y ) = 1, from which we conclude that A ( x , y ) = 1. Thus, F  correctly
computes a reduction function.
T o complete the proof sketch, we need to show that F  runs in time
polynomial in n  = | x |. First, the number of bits required to represent a
configuration is polynomial in n . Why? The program for A  itself has
constant size, independent of the length of its input x . The length of the
input x  is n , and the length of the certificate y  is O ( nk). Since the algorithm
runs for at most O ( nk) steps, the amount of working storage required by A  is
polynomial in n  as well. (W e implicitly assume that this memory is
contiguous. Exercise 34.3-5 asks you to extend the ar gument to the situation
in which the locations accessed by A  are scattered across a much lar ger
region of memory and the particular pattern of scattering can dif fer for each
input x .)
The combinational circuit M  implementing the computer hardware has
size polynomial in the length of a configuration, which is O ( nk), and hence,
the size of M  is polynomial in n . (Most of this circuitry implements the
logic of the memory system.) The circuit C  consists of O ( nk) copies of M ,
and hence it has size polynomial in n . The reduction algorithm F  can
construct C  from x  in polynomial time, since each step of the construction
takes polynomial time.
▪
The language CIRCUIT -SA T is therefore at least as hard as any
language in NP , and since it belongs to NP , it is NP-complete.
Theorem 34.7
The circuit-satisfiability problem is NP-complete.
Proof    Immediate from Lemmas 34.5 and 34.6 and from the definition of
NP-completeness.
▪
Exer cises
34.3-1
V erify that the circuit in Figure 34.8(b)  is unsatisfiable.
34.3-2
Page number: 1251
Show that the ≤P  relation is a transitive relation on languages. That is, show
that if L1  ≤P  L2  and L2  ≤P  L3 , then L1  ≤P  L3 .
34.3-3
Prove that L  ≤P  L  if and only if L  ≤P  L .
34.3-4
Show that an alternative proof of Lemma 34.5 can use a satisfying
assignment as a certificate. Which certificate makes for an easier proof?
34.3-5
The proof of Lemma 34.6 assumes that the working storage for algorithm A
occupies a contiguous region of polynomial size. Where does the proof
exploit this assumption? Ar gue that this assumption does not involve any
loss of generality .
34.3-6
A language L  is complete  for a language class C  with respect to
polynomial-time reductions if L  ∈  C  and L ′ ≤P  L  for all L ′ ∈  C . Show that
Ø and {0, 1}* are the only languages in P that are not complete for P with
respect to polynomial-time reductions.
34.3-7
Show that, with respect to polynomial-time reductions (see Exercise 34.3-
6), L  is complete for NP if and only if L  is complete for co-NP .
34.3-8
The reduction algorithm F  in the proof of Lemma 34.6 constructs the circuit
C  = f  ( x ) based on knowledge of x , A , and k . Professor Sartre observes that
the string x  is input to F , but only the existence of A , k , and the constant
factor implicit in the O ( nk) running time is known to F  (since the language
L  belongs to NP), not their actual values. Thus, the professor concludes that
F  cannot possibly construct the circuit C  and that the language CIRCUIT -
SA T is not necessarily NP-hard. Explain the flaw in the professor ’ s
reasoning.
34.4    NP-completeness pr oofs
Page number: 1252
The proof that the circuit-satisfiability problem is NP-complete showed
directly that L  ≤P  CIRCUIT -SA T for every language L  ∈  NP . This section
shows how to prove that languages are NP-complete without directly
reducing every  language in NP to the given language. W e’ll explore
examples of this methodology by proving that various formula-satisfiability
problems are NP-complete. Section 34.5  provides many more examples.
The following lemma provides a foundation for showing that a given
language is NP-complete.
Lemma 34.8
If L  is a language such that L ′ ≤P  L  for some L ′ ∈  NPC, then L  is NP-hard.
If, in addition, we have L  ∈  NP , then L  ∈  NPC.
Proof    Since L ′ is NP-complete, for all L ″ ∈  NP , we have L ″ ≤P  L ′. By
supposition, we have L ′ ≤P  L , and thus by transitivity (Exercise 34.3-2), we
have L ″ ≤P  L , which shows that L  is NP-hard. If L  ∈  NP , we also have L  ∈
NPC.
▪
In other words, by reducing a known NP-complete language L ′ to L , we
implicitly reduce every language in NP to L . Thus, Lemma 34.8 provides a
method for proving that a language L  is NP-complete:
1 . Prove L  ∈  NP .
2 . Prove that L  is NP-hard:
a. Select a known NP-complete language L ′.
b. Describe an algorithm that computes a function f  mapping every
instance x  ∈  {0, 1}* of L ′ to an instance f  ( x ) of L .
c. Prove that the function f  satisfies x  ∈  L ′ if and only if f  ( x ) ∈  L
for all x  ∈  {0, 1}*.
d. Prove that the algorithm computing f  runs in polynomial time.
This methodology of reducing from a single known NP-complete language
is far simpler than the more complicated process of showing directly how to
reduce from every language in NP . Proving CIRCUIT -SA T ∈  NPC
furnishes a starting point. Knowing that the circuit-satisfiability problem is
Page number: 1253
NP-complete makes it much easier to prove that other problems are NP-
complete. Moreover , as the catalog of known NP-complete problems grows,
so will the choices for languages from which to reduce.
Formula satisfiability
T o illustrate the reduction methodology , let’ s see an NP-completeness proof
for the problem of determining whether a boolean formula , not a cir cuit , is
satisfiable. This problem has the historical honor of being the first problem
ever shown to be NP-complete.
W e formulate the (formula) satisfiability  problem in terms of the
language SA T as follows. An instance of SA T is a boolean formula ϕ
composed of
1 . n  boolean variables: x1 , x2 , … , xn ;
2 . m  boolean connectives: any boolean function with one or two inputs
and one output, such as ∧  (AND), ∨  (OR), ¬ (NOT), →
(implication), ↔ (if and only if); and
3 . parentheses. (W ithout loss of generality , assume that there are no
redundant parentheses, i.e., a formula contains at most one pair of
parentheses per boolean connective.)
W e can encode a boolean formula ϕ  in a length that is polynomial in n  + m .
As in boolean combinational circuits, a truth assignment  for a boolean
formula ϕ  is a set of values for the variables of ϕ , and a satisfying
assignment  is a truth assignment that causes it to evaluate to 1. A formula
with a satisfying assignment is a satisfiable  formula. The satisfiability
problem asks whether a given boolean formula is satisfiable, which we can
express in formal-language terms as
SA T = { 〈 ϕ〉  : ϕ  is a satisfiable boolean formula}.
As an example, the formula
ϕ  = (( x1  → x2 ) ∨  ¬((¬ x1  ↔ x3 ) ∨  x4 )) ∧  ¬ x2
has the satisfying assignment 〈 x1  = 0, x2  = 0, x3  = 1, x4  = 1 〉 , since
Page number: 1254
and thus this formula ϕ  belongs to SA T .
The naive algorithm to determine whether an arbitrary boolean formula
is satisfiable does not run in polynomial time. A formula with n  variables
has 2n possible assignments. If the length of 〈 ϕ〉  is polynomial in n , then
checking every assignment requires Ω(2n) time, which is superpolynomial
in the length of 〈 ϕ〉 . As the following theorem shows, a polynomial-time
algorithm is unlikely to exist.
Theorem 34.9
Satisfiability of boolean formulas is NP-complete.
Proof    W e start by ar guing that SA T ∈  NP . Then we prove that SA T is NP-
hard by showing that CIRCUIT -SA T ≤P  SA T , which by Lemma 34.8 will
prove the theorem.
T o show that SA T belongs to NP , we show that a certificate consisting of
a satisfying assignment for an input formula ϕ  can be verified in
polynomial time. The verifying algorithm simply replaces each variable in
the formula with its corresponding value and then evaluates the expression,
much as we did in equation (34.2) above. This task can be done in
polynomial time. If the expression evaluates to 1, then the algorithm has
verified that the formula is satisfiable. Thus, SA T belongs to NP .
T o prove that SA T is NP-hard, we show that CIRCUIT -SA T ≤P  SA T . In
other words, we need to show how to reduce any instance of circuit
satisfiability to an instance of formula satisfiability in polynomial time. W e
can use induction to express any boolean combinational circuit as a boolean
formula. W e simply look at the gate that produces the circuit output and
inductively express each of the gate’ s inputs as formulas. W e then obtain
the formula for the circuit by writing an expression that applies the gate’ s
function to its inputs’ formulas.
Page number: 1255
Figur e 34.10  Reducing circuit satisfiability to formula satisfiability . The formula produced by the
reduction algorithm has a variable for each wire in the circuit and a clause for each logic gate.
Unfortunately , this straightforward method does not amount to a
polynomial-time reduction. As Exercise 34.4-1 asks you to show , shared
subformulas—which arise from gates whose output wires have fan-out of 2
or more—can cause the size of the generated formula to grow
exponentially . Thus, the reduction algorithm must be somewhat more
clever .
Figure 34.10  illustrates how to overcome this problem, using as an
example the circuit from Figure 34.8(a) . For each wire xi  in the circuit C ,
the formula ϕ  has a variable xi . T o express how each gate operates,
construct a small formula involving the variables of its incident wires. The
formula has the form of an “if and only if” (↔), with the variable for the
gate’ s output on the left and on the right a logical expression encapsulating
the gate’ s function on its inputs. For example, the operation of the output
AND gate (the rightmost gate in the figure) is x10  ↔ ( x7  ∧  x8  ∧  x9 ). W e call
each of these small formulas a clause .
The formula ϕ  produced by the reduction algorithm is the AND of the
circuit-output variable with the conjunction of clauses describing the
operation of each gate. For the circuit in the figure, the formula is
ϕ  = x 10 ∧ ( x 4  ↔ ¬ x 3 )
∧ ( x 5  ↔ ( x 1  ∨  x 2 ))
∧ ( x 6  ↔ ¬ x 4 )
∧ ( x 7  ↔ ( x 1  ∧  x 2  ∧  x 4 ))
∧ ( x 8  ↔ ( x 5  ∨  x 6 ))
∧
Page number: 1256
( x 9  ↔ ( x 6  ∨  x 7 ))
∧ ( x 10  ↔ ( x 7  ∧  x 8  ∧  x 9 )).
Given a circuit C , it is straightforward to produce such a formula ϕ  in
polynomial time.
Why is the circuit C  satisfiable exactly when the formula ϕ  is
satisfiable? If C  has a satisfying assignment, then each wire of the circuit
has a well-defined value, and the output of the circuit is 1. Therefore, when
wire values are assigned to variables in ϕ , each clause of ϕ  evaluates to 1,
and thus the conjunction of all evaluates to 1. Conversely , if some
assignment causes ϕ  to evaluate to 1, the circuit C  is satisfiable by an
analogous ar gument. Thus, we have shown that CIRCUIT -SA T ≤P  SA T ,
which completes the proof.
▪
3-CNF satisfiability
Reducing from formula satisfiability gives us an avenue to prove many
problems NP-complete. The reduction algorithm must handle any input
formula, though, and this requirement can lead to a huge number of cases to
consider . Instead, it is usually simpler to reduce from a restricted language
of boolean formulas. Of course, the restricted language must not be
polynomial-time solvable. One convenient language is 3-CNF satisfiability ,
or 3-CNF-SA T .
In order to define 3-CNF satisfiability , we first need to define a few
terms. A literal  in a boolean formula is an occurrence of a variable (such as
x1 ) or its negation (¬ x1 ). A clause  is the OR of one or more literals, such as
x1  ∨  ¬ x2  ∨  ¬ x3 . A boolean formula is in conjunctive normal form , or CNF ,
if it is expressed as an AND of clauses, and it’ s in 3-conjunctive normal
form , or 3-CNF , if each clause contains exactly three distinct literals.
For example, the boolean formula
( x1  ∨  ¬ x1  ∨  ¬ x2 ) ∧  ( x3  ∨  x2  ∨  x4 ) ∧  (¬ x1  ∨  ¬ x3  ∨  ¬ x4 )
is in 3-CNF . The first of its three clauses is ( x1  ∨  ¬ x1  ∨  ¬ x2 ), which
contains the three literals x1 , ¬ x1 , and ¬ x2 .
The language 3-CNF-SA T consists of encodings of boolean formulas in
3-CNF that are satisfiable. The following theorem shows that a polynomial-
Page number: 1257
time algorithm that can determine the satisfiability of boolean formulas is
unlikely to exist, even when they are expressed in this simple normal form.
Theorem 34.10
Satisfiability of boolean formulas in 3-conjunctive normal form is NP-
complete.
Proof    The ar gument from the proof of Theorem 34.9 to show that SA T ∈
NP applies equally well here to show that 3-CNF-SA T ∈  NP . By Lemma
34.8, therefore, we need only show that SA T ≤P  3-CNF-SA T .
Figur e 34.1 1  The tree corresponding to the formula ϕ  = (( x 1  → x 2 ) ∨ ¬((¬ x 1  ↔ x 3 ) ∨ x 4 )) ∧ ¬ x 2 .
W e break the reduction algorithm into three basic steps. Each step
progressively transforms the input formula ϕ  closer to the desired 3-
conjunctive normal form.
The first step is similar to the one used to prove CIRCUIT -SA T ≤P  SA T
in Theorem 34.9. First, construct a binary “parse” tree for the input formula
ϕ , with literals as leaves and connectives as internal nodes. Figure 34.1 1
shows such a parse tree for the formula
If the input formula contains a clause such as the OR of several literals, use
associativity to parenthesize the expression fully so that every internal node
Page number: 1258
in the resulting tree has just one or two children. The binary parse tree is
like a circuit for computing the function.
Mimicking the reduction in the proof of Theorem 34.9, introduce a
variable yi  for the output of each internal node. Then rewrite the original
formula ϕ  as the AND of the variable at the root of the parse tree and a
conjunction of clauses describing the operation of each node. For the
formula (34.3), the resulting expression is
ϕ ′ = y 1 ∧ ( y 1  ↔ ( y 2  ∧  ¬ x 2 ))
∧ ( y 2  ↔ ( y 3  ∨  y 4 ))
∧ ( y 3  ↔ ( x 1  → x 2 ))
∧ ( y 4  ↔ ¬ y 5 )
∧ ( y 5  ↔ ( y 6  ∨  x 4 ))
∧ ( y 6  ↔ (¬ x 1  ↔ x 3 )).
Figur e 34.12  The truth table for the clause ( y 1  ↔ ( y 2  ∧  ¬ x 2 )).
The formula ϕ ′ thus obtained is a conjunction of clauses 
 , each of which
has at most three literals. These clauses are not yet ORs of three literals.
The second step of the reduction converts each clause 
  into conjunctive
normal form. Construct a truth table for 
  by evaluating all possible
assignments to its variables. Each row of the truth table consists of a
possible assignment of the variables of the clause, together with the value of
the clause under that assignment. Using the truth-table entries that evaluate
to 0, build a formula in disjunctive normal form  (or DNF )—an OR of
ANDs—that is equivalent to ¬ 
 . Then negate this formula and convert it
into a CNF formula 
  by using DeMorgan’ s laws  for propositional logic,
¬( a  ∧  b ) = ¬ a  ∨  ¬ b,
Page number: 1259
¬( a  ∨  b ) = ¬ a  ∧  ¬ b,
to complement all literals, change ORs into ANDs, and change ANDs into
ORs.
In our example, the clause 
  converts into CNF as
follows. The truth table for 
  appears in Figure 34.12 . The DNF formula
equivalent to ¬ 
  is
( y1  ∧  y2  ∧  x2 ) ∨  ( y1  ∧  ¬ y2  ∧  x2 ) ∨  ( y1  ∧  ¬ y2  ∧  ¬ x2 ) ∨  (¬ y1  ∧  y2  ∧  ¬ x2 ).
Negating and applying DeMor gan’ s laws yields the CNF formula
which is equivalent to the original clause 
 .
At this point, each clause 
  of the formula ϕ ′ has been converted into a
CNF formula 
 , and thus ϕ ′ is equivalent to the CNF formula ϕ ″ consisting
of the conjunction of the 
 . Moreover , each clause of ϕ ″ has at most three
literals.
The third and final step of the reduction further transforms the formula
so that each clause has exactly  three distinct literals. From the clauses of the
CNF formula ϕ ″, construct the final 3-CNF formula ϕ ‴ . This formula also
uses two auxiliary variables, p  and q . For each clause Ci  of ϕ ″, include the
following clauses in ϕ ‴ :
If Ci  contains three distinct literals, then simply include Ci  as a clause
of ϕ ‴ .
If Ci  contains exactly two distinct literals, that is, if Ci  = ( l1  ∨  l2 ),
where l1  and l2  are literals, then include ( l1  ∨  l2  ∨  p ) ∧  ( l1  ∨  l2  ∨  ¬ p )
as clauses of ϕ ‴ . The literals p  and ¬ p  merely fulfill the syntactic
requirement that each clause of ϕ ‴  contain exactly three distinct
literals. Whether p  = 0 or p  = 1, one of the clauses is equivalent to l1
∨  l2 , and the other evaluates to 1, which is the identity for AND.
If Ci  contains just one distinct literal l , then include ( l  ∨ p  ∨ q ) ∧ ( l  ∨  p
∨  ¬ q ) ∧  ( l  ∨  ¬ p  ∨  q ) ∧  ( l  ∨  ¬ p  ∨  ¬ q ) as clauses of ϕ ‴ . Regardless
Page number: 1260
of the values of p  and q , one of the four clauses is equivalent to l , and
the other three evaluate to 1.
W e can see that the 3-CNF formula ϕ ‴  is satisfiable if and only if ϕ  is
satisfiable by inspecting each of the three steps. Like the reduction from
CIRCUIT -SA T to SA T , the construction of ϕ ′ from ϕ  in the first step
preserves satisfiability . The second step produces a CNF formula ϕ ″ that is
algebraically equivalent to ϕ ′. Then the third step produces a 3-CNF
formula ϕ ‴  that is ef fectively equivalent to ϕ ″, since any assignment to the
variables p  and q  produces a formula that is algebraically equivalent to ϕ ″.
W e must also show that the reduction can be computed in polynomial
time. Constructing ϕ ′ from ϕ  introduces at most one variable and one
clause per connective in ϕ . Constructing ϕ ″ from ϕ ′ can introduce at most
eight clauses into ϕ ″ for each clause from ϕ ′, since each clause of ϕ ′
contains at most three variables, and the truth table for each clause has at
most 23 = 8 rows. The construction of ϕ ‴  from ϕ ″ introduces at most four
clauses into ϕ ‴  for each clause of ϕ ″. Thus the size of the resulting formula
ϕ ‴  is polynomial in the length of the original formula. Each of the
constructions can be accomplished in polynomial time.
▪
Exer cises
34.4-1
Consider the straightforward (nonpolynomial-time) reduction in the proof
of Theorem 34.9. Describe a circuit of size n  that, when converted to a
formula by this method, yields a formula whose size is exponential in n .
34.4-2
Show the 3-CNF formula that results upon using the method of Theorem
34.10 on the formula (34.3).
34.4-3
Professor Jagger proposes to show that SA T ≤P  3-CNF-SA T by using only
the truth-table technique in the proof of Theorem 34.10, and not the other
steps. That is, the professor proposes to take the boolean formula ϕ , form a
truth table for its variables, derive from the truth table a formula in 3-DNF
that is equivalent to ¬ ϕ , and then negate and apply DeMor gan’ s laws to
Page number: 1261
produce a 3-CNF formula equivalent to ϕ . Show that this strategy does not
yield a polynomial-time reduction.
34.4-4
Show that the problem of determining whether a boolean formula is a
tautology is complete for co-NP . ( Hint:  See Exercise 34.3-7.)
34.4-5
Show that the problem of determining the satisfiability of boolean formulas
in disjunctive normal form is polynomial-time solvable.
34.4-6
Someone gives you a polynomial-time algorithm to decide formula
satisfiability . Describe how to use this algorithm to find satisfying
assignments in polynomial time.
34.4-7
Let 2-CNF-SA T be the set of satisfiable boolean formulas in CNF with
exactly two literals per clause. Show that 2-CNF-SA T ∈  P . Make your
algorithm as ef ficient as possible. ( Hint:  Observe that x  ∨  y  is equivalent to
¬ x  → y . Reduce 2-CNF-SA T to an ef ficiently solvable problem on a
directed graph.)
34.5    NP-complete pr oblems
NP-complete problems arise in diverse domains: boolean logic, graphs,
arithmetic, network design, sets and partitions, storage and retrieval,
sequencing and scheduling, mathematical programming, algebra and
number theory , games and puzzles, automata and language theory , program
optimization, biology , chemistry , physics, and more. This section uses the
reduction methodology to provide NP-completeness proofs for a variety of
problems drawn from graph theory and set partitioning.
Page number: 1262
Figur e 34.13  The structure of NP-completeness proofs in Sections 34.4  and 34.5 . All proofs
ultimately follow by reduction from the NP-completeness of CIRCUIT -SA T .
Figure 34.13  outlines the structure of the NP-completeness proofs in this
section and Section 34.4 . W e prove each language in the figure to be NP-
complete by reduction from the language that points to it. At the root is
CIRCUIT -SA T , which we proved NP-complete in Theorem 34.7. This
section concludes with a recap of reduction strategies.
34.5.1    The clique pr oblem
A clique  in an undirected graph G  = ( V , E ) is a subset V ′ ⊆  V  of vertices,
each pair of which is connected by an edge in E . In other words, a clique is
a complete subgraph of G . The size  of a clique is the number of vertices it
contains. The clique problem  is the optimization problem of finding a
clique of maximum size in a graph. The corresponding decision problem
asks simply whether a clique of a given size k  exists in the graph. The
formal definition is
CLIQUE = { 〈 G, k 〉  : G  is a graph containing a clique of size k }.
A naive algorithm for determining whether a graph G  = ( V , E ) with | V |
vertices contains a clique of size k  lists all k -subsets of V  and checks each
one to see whether it forms a clique. The running time of this algorithm is 
, which is polynomial if k  is a constant. In general, however , k
Page number: 1263
could be near | V |/2, in which case the algorithm runs in superpolynomial
time. Indeed, an ef ficient algorithm for the clique problem is unlikely to
exist.
Theorem 34.1 1
The clique problem is NP-complete.
Proof    First, we show that CLIQUE ∈  NP . For a given graph G  = ( V , E ),
use the set V ′ ⊆  V  of vertices in the clique as a certificate for G . T o check
whether V ′ is a clique in polynomial time, check whether , for each pair u, v
∈  V ′, the edge ( u , v ) belongs to E .
W e next prove that 3-CNF-SA T ≤P  CLIQUE, which shows that the
clique problem is NP-hard. Y ou might be surprised that the proof reduces an
instance of 3-CNF-SA T to an instance of CLIQUE, since on the surface
logical formulas seem to have little to do with graphs.
The reduction algorithm begins with an instance of 3-CNF-SA T . Let ϕ  =
C1  ∧  C2  ∧  ⋯  ∧  Ck  be a boolean formula in 3-CNF with k  clauses. For r  =
1, 2, … , k , each clause Cr  contains exactly three distinct literals: 
 , and 
. W e will construct a graph G  such that ϕ  is satisfiable if and only if G
contains a clique of size k .
W e construct the undirected graph G  = ( V , E ) as follows. For each clause
 in ϕ , place a triple of vertices 
 , and 
  into V . Add edge
 into E  if both of the following hold:
 and 
  are in dif ferent triples, that is, r  ≠ s , and
their corresponding literals are consistent , that is, 
  is not the
negation of 
 .
W e can build this graph from ϕ  in polynomial time. As an example of this
construction, if
ϕ  = ( x1  ∨  ¬ x2  ∨  ¬ x3 ) ∧  (¬ x1  ∨  x2  ∨  x3 ) ∧  ( x1  ∨  x2  ∨  x3 ),
then G  is the graph shown in Figure 34.14 .
W e must show that this transformation of ϕ  into G  is a reduction. First,
suppose that ϕ  has a satisfying assignment. Then each clause Cr  contains at
least one literal 
  that is assigned 1, and each such literal corresponds to a
vertex 
 . Picking one such “true” literal from each clause yields a set V ′ of
Page number: 1264
k  vertices. W e claim that V ′ is a clique. For any two vertices 
 ,
where r  ≠ s , both corresponding literals 
  and 
  map to 1 by the given
satisfying assignment, and thus the literals cannot be complements. Thus,
by the construction of G , the edge 
  belongs to E .
Conversely , suppose that G  contains a clique V ′ of size k . No edges in G
connect vertices in the same triple, and so V ′ contains exactly one vertex per
triple. If 
 , then assign 1 to the corresponding literal 
 . Since G
contains no edges between inconsistent literals, no literal and its
complement are both assigned 1. Each clause is satisfied, and so ϕ  is
satisfied. (Any variables that do not correspond to a vertex in the clique
may be set arbitrarily .)
▪
Figur e 34.14  The graph G  derived from the 3-CNF formula ϕ  = C 1  ∧  C 2  ∧  C 3 , where C 1  = ( x 1  ∨
¬ x 2  ∨  ¬ x 3 ), C 2  = (¬ x 1  ∨  x 2  ∨  x 3 ), and C 3  = ( x 1  ∨  x 2  ∨  x 3 ), in reducing 3-CNF-SA T to CLIQUE. A
satisfying assignment of the formula has x 2  = 0, x 3  = 1, and x 1  set to either 0 or 1. This assignment
satisfies C 1  with ¬ x 2 , and it satisfies C 2  and C 3  with x 3 , corresponding to the clique with blue
vertices.
In the example of Figure 34.14 , a satisfying assignment of ϕ  has x2  = 0
and x3  = 1. A corresponding clique of size k  = 3 consists of the vertices
corresponding to ¬ x2  from the first clause, x3  from the second clause, and x3
Page number: 1265
from the third clause. Because the clique contains no vertices corresponding
to either x1  or ¬ x1 , this satisfying assignment can set x1  to either 0 or 1.
The proof of Theorem 34.1 1 reduced an arbitrary instance of 3-CNF-
SA T to an instance of CLIQUE with a particular structure. Y ou might think
that we have shown only that CLIQUE is NP-hard in graphs in which the
vertices are restricted to occur in triples and in which there are no edges
between vertices in the same triple. Indeed, we have shown that CLIQUE is
NP-hard only in this restricted case, but this proof suf fices to show that
CLIQUE is NP-hard in general graphs. Why? If there were a polynomial-
time algorithm that solves CLIQUE on general graphs, it would also solve
CLIQUE on restricted graphs.
The opposite approach—reducing instances of 3-CNF-SA T with a
special structure to general instances of CLIQUE—does not suf fice,
however . Why not? Perhaps the instances of 3-CNF-SA T that we choose to
reduce from are “easy ,” and so we would not have reduced an NP-hard
problem to CLIQUE.
Moreover , the reduction uses the instance of 3-CNF-SA T , but not the
solution. W e would have erred if the polynomial-time reduction had relied
on knowing whether the formula ϕ  is satisfiable, since we do not know how
to decide whether ϕ  is satisfiable in polynomial time.
Figur e 34.15  Reducing CLIQUE to VER TEX-COVER. (a)  An undirected graph G  = ( V , E ) with
clique V ′ = { u, v , x, y }, shown in blue. (b)  The graph G  produced by the reduction algorithm that has
vertex cover V  − V′  = { w , z }, in blue.
34.5.2    The vertex-cover pr oblem
Page number: 1266
A vertex cover  of an undirected graph G  = ( V , E ) is a subset V ′ ⊆  V  such
that if ( u , v ) ∈  E , then u  ∈  V ′ or v  ∈  V ′ (or both). That is, each vertex
“covers” its incident edges, and a vertex cover for G  is a set of vertices that
covers all the edges in E . The size  of a vertex cover is the number of
vertices in it. For example, the graph in Figure 34.15(b)  has a vertex cover
{ w , z } of size 2.
The vertex-cover problem  is to find a vertex cover of minimum size in a
given graph. For this optimization problem, the corresponding decision
problem asks whether a graph has a vertex cover of a given size k . As a
language, we define
VER TEX-COVER = { 〈 G, k 〉  : graph G  has a vertex cover of size k }.
The following theorem shows that this problem is NP-complete.
Theorem 34.12
The vertex-cover problem is NP-complete.
Proof    W e first show that VER TEX-COVER ∈  NP . Given a graph G  = ( V ,
E ) and an integer k , the certificate is the vertex cover V ′ ⊆  V  itself. The
verification algorithm af firms that | V ′| = k , and then it checks, for each edge
( u , v ) ∈  E , that u  ∈  V ′ or v  ∈  V ′. It is easy to verify the certificate in
polynomial time.
T o prove that the vertex-cover problem is NP-hard, we reduce from the
clique problem, showing that CLIQUE ≤P  VER TEX-COVER. This
reduction relies on the notion of the complement of a graph. Given an
undirected graph G  = ( V , E ), we define the complement  of G  as a graph G  =
( V , E ), where E  = {( u , v ) : u, v  ∈  V , u  ≠ v , and ( u , v ) ∉  E }. In other words,
G  is the graph containing exactly those edges that are not in G . Figure 34.15
shows a graph and its complement and illustrates the reduction from
CLIQUE to VER TEX-COVER.
The reduction algorithm takes as input an instance 〈 G, k 〉  of the clique
problem and computes the complement G  in polynomial time. The output
of the reduction algorithm is the instance 〈 G , | V | − k〉  of the vertex-cover
problem. T o complete the proof, we show that this transformation is indeed
a reduction: the graph G  contains a clique of size k  if and only if the graph
G  has a vertex cover of size | V | − k .
Page number: 1267
Suppose that G  contains a clique V ′ ⊆  V  with | V ′| = k . W e claim that V  −
V ′ is a vertex cover in G . Let ( u , v ) be any edge in E . Then, ( u , v ) ∉  E ,
which implies that at least one of u  or v  does not belong to V ′, since every
pair of vertices in V ′ is connected by an edge of E . Equivalently , at least one
of u  or v  belongs to V  − V ′, which means that edge ( u , v ) is covered by V  −
V ′. Since ( u , v ) was chosen arbitrarily from E , every edge of E  is covered by
a vertex in V  − V ′. Hence the set V  − V ′, which has size | V | − k , forms a
vertex cover for G .
Conversely , suppose that G  has a vertex cover V ′ ⊆  V , where | V ′| = | V | −
k . Then for all u, v  ∈  V , if ( u , v ) ∈  E , then u  ∈  V ′ or v  ∈  V ′ or both. The
contrapositive of this implication is that for all u, v  ∈  V , if u  ∉  V ′ and v  ∉
V ′, then ( u , v ) ∈  E . In other words, V  − V ′ is a clique, and it has size | V |−| V ′|
= k .
▪
Since VER TEX-COVER is NP-complete, we don’ t expect to find a
polynomial-time algorithm for finding a minimum-size vertex cover .
Section 35.1  presents a polynomial-time “approximation algorithm,”
however , which produces “approximate” solutions for the vertex-cover
problem. The size of a vertex cover produced by the algorithm is at most
twice the minimum size of a vertex cover .
Thus, you shouldn’ t give up hope just because a problem is NP-
complete. Y ou might be able to design a polynomial-time approximation
algorithm that obtains near -optimal solutions, even though finding an
optimal solution is NP-complete. Chapter 35  gives several approximation
algorithms for NP-complete problems.
34.5.3    The hamiltonian-cycle pr oblem
W e now return to the hamiltonian-cycle problem defined in Section 34.2 .
Theorem 34.13
The hamiltonian cycle problem is NP-complete.
Page number: 1268
Figur e 34.16  The gadget used in reducing the vertex-cover problem to the hamiltonian-cycle
problem. An edge ( u , v ) of graph G  corresponds to gadget Γ uv  in the graph G ′ created in the
reduction. (a)  The gadget, with individual vertices labeled. (b)–(d)  The paths highlighted in blue are
the only possible ones through the gadget that include all vertices, assuming that the only connections
from the gadget to the remainder of G ′ are through vertices [ u, v , 1], [ u, v , 6], [ v , u , 1], and [ v , u , 6].
Proof    W e first show that HAM-CYCLE ∈  NP . Given an undirected graph
G  = ( V , E ), the certificate is the sequence of | V | vertices that makes up the
hamiltonian cycle. The verification algorithm checks that this sequence
contains each vertex in V  exactly once and that with the first vertex repeated
at the end, it forms a cycle in G . That is, it checks that there is an edge
between each pair of consecutive vertices and between the first and last
vertices. This certificate can be verified in polynomial time.
W e now prove that VER TEX-COVER ≤P  HAM-CYCLE, which shows
that HAM-CYCLE is NP-complete. Given an undirected graph G  = ( V , E )
and an integer k , we construct an undirected graph G ′ = ( V ′, E ′) that has a
hamiltonian cycle if and only if G  has a vertex cover of size k . W e assume
without loss of generality that G  contains no isolated vertices (that is, every
vertex in V  has at least one incident edge) and that k  ≤ | V |. (If an isolated
vertex belongs to a vertex cover of size k , then there also exists a vertex
cover of size k  − 1, and for any graph, the entire set V  is always a vertex
cover .)
Our construction uses a gadget , which is a piece of a graph that enforces
certain properties. Figure 34.16(a)  shows the gadget we use. For each edge
( u , v ) ∈  E , the constructed graph G ′ contains one copy of this gadget, which
we denote by Γuv . W e denote each vertex in Γuv  by [ u, v , i ] or [ v , u, i ], where
1 ≤ i  ≤ 6, so that each gadget Γuv  contains 12 vertices. Gadget Γuv  also
contains the 14 edges shown in Figure 34.16(a) .
Page number: 1269
Along with the internal structure of the gadget, we enforce the properties
we want by limiting the connections between the gadget and the remainder
of the graph G ′ that we construct. In particular , only vertices [ u, v ,  1], [ u, v ,
6], [ v , u,  1], and [ v , u,  6] will have edges incident from outside Γuv . Any
hamiltonian cycle of G ′ must traverse the edges of Γuv  in one of the three
ways shown in Figures 34.16(b) – (d) . If the cycle enters through vertex [ u, v ,
1], it must exit through vertex [ u, v ,  6], and it either visits all 12 of the
gadget’ s vertices ( Figure 34.16(b) ) or the six vertices [ u, v ,  1] through [ u, v ,
6] ( Figure 34.16(c) ). In the latter case, the cycle will have to reenter the
gadget to visit vertices [ v , u,  1] through [ v , u,  6]. Similarly , if the cycle
enters through vertex [ v , u,  1], it must exit through vertex [ v , u,  6], and
either it visits all 12 of the gadget’ s vertices ( Figure 34.16(d) ) or it visits the
six vertices [ v , u,  1] through [ v , u,  6] and reenters to visit [ u, v ,  1] through
[ u, v ,  6] ( Figure 34.16(c) ). No other paths through the gadget that visit all 12
vertices are possible. In particular , it is impossible to construct two vertex-
disjoint paths, one of which connects [ u, v ,  1] to [ v , u,  6] and the other of
which connects [ v , u,  1] to [ u, v ,  6], such that the union of the two paths
contains all of the gadget’ s vertices.
The only other vertices in V ′ other than those of gadgets are selector
vertices  s1 , s2 , … , sk . W e’ll use edges incident on selector vertices in G ′ to
select the k  vertices of the cover in G .
In addition to the edges in gadgets, E ′ contains two other types of edges,
which Figure 34.17  shows. First, for each vertex u  ∈  V , edges join pairs of
gadgets in order to form a path containing all gadgets corresponding to
edges incident on u  in G . W e arbitrarily order the vertices adjacent to each
vertex u  ∈  V  as u(1), u(2), … , u(degree( u )), where degree( u ) is the number of
vertices adjacent to u . T o create a path in G ′ through all the gadgets
corresponding to edges incident on u , E ′ contains the edges {([ u , u( i ), 6], [ u ,
u( i +1), 1]) : 1 ≤ i  ≤ degree( u ) − 1}. In Figure 34.17 , for example, we order
the vertices adjacent to w  as 〈 x, y , z〉 , and so graph G ′ in part (b) of the
figure includes the edges ([ w , x , 6], [ w , y , 1]) and ([ w , y , 6], [ w , z , 1]). The
vertices adjacent to x  are ordered as 〈 w , y〉 , so that G ′ includes the edge ([ x ,
w , 6], [ x , y , 1]). For each vertex u  ∈  V , these edges in G ′ fill in a path
containing all gadgets corresponding to edges incident on u  in G .
The intuition behind these edges is that if vertex u  ∈  V  belongs to the
vertex cover of G , then G ′ contains a path from [ u, u(1), 1] to [ u, u(degree( u )),
Page number: 1270
6] that “covers” all gadgets corresponding to edges incident on u . That is,
for each of these gadgets, say 
 , the path either includes all 12 vertices
(if u  belongs to the vertex cover but u( i ) does not) or just the six vertices [ u,
u( i ), 1] through [ u, u( i ), 6] (if both u  and u( i ) belong to the vertex cover).
The final type of edge in E ′ joins the first vertex [ u, u(1), 1] and the last
vertex [ u, u(degree( u )), 6] of each of these paths to each of the selector
vertices. That is, E ′ includes the edges
{( s j , [ u, u(1), 1]) : u  ∈  V  and 1 ≤ j  ≤ k }
∪  {( s j , [ u, u(degree( u )), 6]) : u  ∈  V  and 1 ≤ j  ≤
k }.
Figur e 34.17  Reducing an instance of the vertex-cover problem to an instance of the hamiltonian-
cycle problem. (a)  An undirected graph G  with a vertex cover of size 2, consisting of the blue
vertices w  and y . (b)  The undirected graph G ′ produced by the reduction, with the hamiltonian cycle
corresponding to the vertex cover highlighted in blue. The vertex cover { w , y } corresponds to edges
( s 1 , [ w , x , 1]) and ( s 2 , [ y , x , 1]) appearing in the hamiltonian cycle.
Page number: 1271
Next we show that the size of G ′ is polynomial in the size of G , and
hence it takes time polynomial in the size of G  to construct G ′. The vertices
of G ′ are those in the gadgets, plus the selector vertices. W ith 12 vertices
per gadget, plus k  ≤ | V  | selector vertices, G ′ contains a total of
| V′ | = 12 | E | + k
≤ 12 | E | + | V |
vertices. The edges of G ′ are those in the gadgets, those that go between
gadgets, and those connecting selector vertices to gadgets. Each gadget
contains 14 edges, totaling 14 | E | in all gadgets. For each vertex u  ∈  V ,
graph G ′ has degree( u ) − 1 edges going between gadgets, so that summed
over all vertices in V ,
edges go between gadgets. Finally , G ′ has two edges for each pair
consisting of a selector vertex and a vertex of V , totaling 2 k  | V | such edges.
The total number of edges of G ′ is therefore
| E′ | = (14 | E |) + (2 | E | − | V |) + (2 k  | V |)
= 16 | E | + (2 k  − 1) | V |
≤ 16 | E | + (2 | V | − 1) | V |.
Now we show that the transformation from graph G  to G ′ is a reduction.
That is, we must show that G  has a vertex cover of size k  if and only if G ′
has a hamiltonian cycle.
Suppose that G  = ( V , E ) has a vertex cover V * ⊆  V , where | V *| = k . Let
V * = { u1 , u2 , … , uk }. As Figure 34.17  shows, we can construct a
hamiltonian cycle in G ′ by including the following edges1 1 for each vertex
uj  ∈  V *. Start by including edges 
, which connect all gadgets
corresponding to edges incident on uj . Also include the edges within these
gadgets as Figures 34.16(b) – (d)  show , depending on whether the edge is
covered by one or two vertices in V *. The hamiltonian cycle also includes
the edges
Page number: 1272
By inspecting Figure 34.17 , you can verify that these edges form a cycle,
where u1  = w  and u2  = y . The cycle starts at s1 , visits all gadgets
corresponding to edges incident on u1 , then visits s2 , visits all gadgets
corresponding to edges incident on u2 , and so on, until it returns to s1 . The
cycle visits each gadget either once or twice, depending on whether one or
two vertices of V * cover its corresponding edge. Because V * is a vertex
cover for G , each edge in E  is incident on some vertex in V *, and so the
cycle visits each vertex in each gadget of G ′. Because the cycle also visits
every selector vertex, it is hamiltonian.
Conversely , suppose that G ′ = ( V ′, E ′) contains a hamiltonian cycle C  ⊆
E ′. W e claim that the set
is a vertex cover for G .
W e first ar gue that the set V * is well defined, that is, for each selector
vertex sj , exactly one of the incident edges in the hamiltonian cycle C  is of
the form ( sj , [ u , u(1), 1]) for some vertex u  ∈  V . T o see why , partition the
hamiltonian cycle C  into maximal paths that start at some selector vertex si ,
visit one or more gadgets, and end at some selector vertex sj  without
passing through any other selector vertex. Let’ s call each of these maximal
paths a “cover path.” Let P  be one such cover path, and orient it going from
si  to sj . If P  contains the edge ( si , [ u , u(1), 1]) for some vertex u  ∈  V , then
we have shown that one edge incident on si  has the required form. Assume,
then, that P  contains the edge ( si , [ v , v(degree( v )), 6]) for some vertex v  ∈  V .
This path enters a gadget from the bottom, as drawn in Figures 34.16  and
34.17 , and it leaves from the top. It might go through several gadgets, but it
always enters from the bottom of a gadget and leaves from the top. The
only edges incident on vertices at the top of a gadget either go to the
bottoms of other gadgets or to selector vertices. Therefore, after the last
gadget in the series of gadgets visited by P , the edge taken must go to a
Page number: 1273
selector vertex sj , so that P  contains an edge of the form ( sj , [ u , u(1), 1]),
where [ u, u(1), 1] is a vertex at the top of some gadget. T o see that not both
edges incident on sj  have this form, simply reverse the direction of
traversing P  in the above ar gument.
Having established that the set V * is well defined, let’ s see why it is a
vertex cover for G . W e have already established that each cover path starts
at some si , takes the edge ( si , [ u, u(1), 1]) for some vertex u  ∈  V , passes
through all the gadgets corresponding to edges in E  incident on u , and then
ends at some selector vertex sj . (This orientation is the reverse of the
orientation in the paragraph above.) Let’ s call this cover path Pu , and by
equation (34.4), the vertex cover V * includes u . Each gadget visited by Pu
must be Γuv  or Γvu  for some v  ∈  V . For each gadget visited by Pu , its
vertices are visited by either one or two cover paths. If they are visited by
one cover path, then edge ( u , v ) ∈  E  is covered in G  by vertex u . If two
cover paths visit the gadget, then the other cover path must be Pv , which
implies that v  ∈  V *, and edge ( u , v ) ∈  E  is covered by both u  and v .
Because each vertex in each gadget is visited by some cover path, we see
that each edge in E  is covered by some vertex in V *.
▪
34.5.4    The traveling-salesperson pr oblem
In the traveling-salesperson problem , which is closely related to the
hamiltonian-cycle problem, a salesperson must visit n  cities. Let’ s model
the problem as a complete graph with n  vertices, so that the salesperson
wishes to make a tour , or hamiltonian cycle, visiting each city exactly once
and finishing at the starting city . The salesperson incurs a nonnegative
integer cost c ( i, j ) to travel from city i  to city j . In the optimization version
of the problem, the salesperson wishes to make the tour whose total cost is
minimum, where the total cost is the sum of the individual costs along the
edges of the tour . For example, in Figure 34.18 , a minimum-cost tour is 〈 u,
w , v , x, u 〉 , with cost 7. The formal language for the corresponding decision
problem is
Page number: 1274
Figur e 34.18  An instance of the traveling-salesperson problem. Edges highlighted in blue represent a
minimum-cost tour , with cost 7.
TSP = { 〈 G, c, k 〉 : G  = ( V , E ) is a complete graph,
c  is a function from V  × V  → ℕ ,
k  ∈  ℕ , and
G  has a traveling-salesperson tour with cost at most k }.
The following theorem shows that a fast algorithm for the traveling-
salesperson problem is unlikely to exist.
Theorem 34.14
The traveling-salesperson problem is NP-complete.
Proof    W e first show that TSP ∈  NP . Given an instance of the problem, the
certificate is the sequence of n  vertices in the tour . The verification
algorithm checks that this sequence contains each vertex exactly once, sums
up the edge costs, and checks that the sum is at most k . This process can
certainly be done in polynomial time.
T o prove that TSP is NP-hard, we show that HAM-CYCLE ≤P  TSP .
Given an instance G  = ( V , E ) of HAM-CYCLE, construct an instance of
TSP by forming the complete graph G ′ = ( V , E ′), where E ′ = {( i , j ) : i, j  ∈  V
and i  ≠ j  }, with the cost function c  defined as
(Because G  is undirected, it contains no self-loops, and so c ( v , v ) = 1 for all
vertices v  ∈  V .) The instance of TSP is then 〈 G ′, c , 0〉 , which can be created
in polynomial time.
W e now show that graph G  has a hamiltonian cycle if and only if graph
G ′ has a tour of cost at most 0. Suppose that graph G  has a hamiltonian
Page number: 1275
cycle H . Each edge in H  belongs to E  and thus has cost 0 in G ′. Thus, H  is a
tour in G ′ with cost 0. Conversely , suppose that graph G ′ has a tour H ′ of
cost at most 0. Since the costs of the edges in E ′ are 0 and 1, the cost of tour
H ′ is exactly 0 and each edge on the tour must have cost 0. Therefore, H ′
contains only edges in E . W e conclude that H ′ is a hamiltonian cycle in
graph G .
▪
34.5.5    The subset-sum pr oblem
W e next consider an arithmetic NP-complete problem. The subset-sum
problem  takes as inputs a finite set S  of positive integers and an integer
target  t  > 0. It asks whether there exists a subset S ′ ⊆  S  whose elements
sum to exactly t . For example, if S  = {1, 2, 7, 14, 49, 98, 343, 686, 2409,
2793, 16808, 17206, 1 17705, 1 17993} and t  = 138457, then the subset S ′ =
{1, 2, 7, 98, 343, 686, 2409, 17206, 1 17705} is a solution.
As usual, we express the problem as a language:
SUBSET -SUM = { 〈 S , t〉  : there exists a subset S ′ ⊆  S  such that t  = Σs ∈ S ′  S }.
As with any arithmetic problem, it is important to recall that our standard
encoding assumes that the input integers are coded in binary . W ith this
assumption in mind, we can show that the subset-sum problem is unlikely
to have a fast algorithm.
Theorem 34.15
The subset-sum problem is NP-complete.
Proof    T o show that SUBSET -SUM ∈  NP , for an instance 〈 S, t 〉  of the
problem, let the subset S ′ be the certificate. A verification algorithm can
check whether t  = Σs ∈ S ′  S  in polynomial time.
W e now show that 3-CNF-SA T ≤P  SUBSET -SUM. Given a 3-CNF
formula ϕ  over variables x1 , x2 , … , xn  with clauses C1 , C2 , … , Ck , each
containing exactly three distinct literals, the reduction algorithm constructs
an instance 〈 S, t 〉  of the subset-sum problem such that ϕ  is satisfiable if and
only if there exists a subset of S  whose sum is exactly t . W ithout loss of
generality , we make two simplifying assumptions about the formula ϕ .
First, no clause contains both a variable and its negation, for such a clause
Page number: 1276
is automatically satisfied by any assignment of values to the variables.
Second, each variable appears in at least one clause, because it does not
matter what value is assigned to a variable that appears in no clauses.
The reduction creates two numbers in set S  for each variable xi  and two
numbers in S  for each clause Cj . The numbers will be represented in base
10, with each number containing n  + k  digits and each digit corresponding
to either one variable or one clause. Base 10 (and other bases, as we shall
see) has the property we need of preventing carries from lower digits to
higher digits.
Figur e 34.19  The reduction of 3-CNF-SA T to SUBSET -SUM. The formula in 3-CNF is ϕ  =
C 1 ∧ C 2 ∧ C 3 ∧ C 4 , where C 1  = ( x 1 ∨ ¬ x 2 ∨ ¬ x 3 ), C 2  = (¬ x 1 ∨ ¬ x 2 ∨ ¬ x 3 ), C 3  = (¬ x 1 ∨ ¬ x 2 ∨ x 3 ), and C 4
= ( x 1  ∨  x 2  ∨  x 3 ). A satisfying assignment of ϕ  is 〈 x 1  = 0, x 2  = 0, x 3  = 1 〉 . The set S  produced by the
reduction consists of the base-10 numbers shown: reading from top to bottom, S  = {1001001,
10001 10, 100001, 101 1 10, 1001 1, 1 1 100, 1000, 2000, 100, 200, 10, 20, 1, 2}. The tar get t  is 1 1 14444.
The subset S ′ ⊆  S  is shaded blue, and it contains 
 , and v 3 , corresponding to the satisfying
assignment. Subset S ′ also contains slack variables s 1 , 
 , s 3 , s 4 , and 
  to achieve the tar get value
of 4 in the digits labeled by C 1  through C 4 .
As Figure 34.19  shows, we construct set S  and tar get t  as follows. Label
each digit position by either a variable or a clause. The least significant k
Page number: 1277
digits are labeled by the clauses, and the most significant n  digits are
labeled by variables.
The tar get t  has a 1 in each digit labeled by a variable and a 4 in each
digit labeled by a clause.
For each variable xi , set S  contains two integers vi  and 
 . Each of vi
and 
  has a 1 in the digit labeled by xi  and 0s in the other variable
digits. If literal xi  appears in clause Cj , then the digit labeled by Cj  in
vi  contains a 1. If literal ¬ xi  appears in clause Cj , then the digit
labeled by Cj  in 
  contains a 1. All other digits labeled by clauses in
vi  and 
  are 0.
All vi  and 
  values in set S  are unique. Why? For ℓ  ≠ i , no vℓ  or 
values can equal vi  and 
  in the most significant n  digits.
Furthermore, by our simplifying assumptions above, no vi  and 
  can
be equal in all k  least significant digits. If vi  and 
  were equal, then xi
and ¬ xi  would have to appear in exactly the same set of clauses. But
we assume that no clause contains both xi  and ¬ xi  and that either xi  or
¬ xi  appears in some clause, and so there must be some clause Cj  for
which vi  and 
  dif fer .
For each clause Cj , set S  contains two integers sj  and 
 . Each of sj  and
 has 0s in all digits other than the one labeled by Cj . For sj , there is a
1 in the Cj  digit, and 
  has a 2 in this digit. These integers are “slack
variables,” which we use to get each clause-labeled digit position to
add to the tar get value of 4.
Simple inspection of Figure 34.19  demonstrates that all sj  and 
values in S  are unique in set S .
The greatest sum of digits in any one digit position is 6, which occurs in
the digits labeled by clauses (three 1s from the vi  and 
  values, plus 1 and 2
from the sj  and 
  values). Interpreting these numbers in base 10, therefore,
no carries can occur from lower digits to higher digits.12
Page number: 1278
The reduction can be performed in polynomial time. The set S  consists
of 2 n  + 2 k  values, each of which has n  + k  digits, and the time to produce
each digit is polynomial in n  + k . The tar get t  has n  + k  digits, and the
reduction produces each in constant time.
Let’ s now show that the 3-CNF formula ϕ  is satisfiable if and only if
there exists a subset S ′ ⊆  S  whose sum is t . First, suppose that ϕ  has a
satisfying assignment. For i  = 1, 2, … , n , if xi  = 1 in this assignment, then
include vi  in S ′. Otherwise, include 
 . In other words, S ′ includes exactly
the vi  and 
  values that correspond to literals with the value 1 in the
satisfying assignment. Having included either vi  or 
 , but not both, for all i ,
and having put 0 in the digits labeled by variables in all sj  and 
 , we see that
for each variable-labeled digit, the sum of the values of S ′ must be 1, which
matches those digits of the tar get t . Because each clause is satisfied, the
clause contains some literal with the value 1. Therefore, each digit labeled
by a clause has at least one 1 contributed to its sum by a vi  or 
  value in S ′.
In fact, one, two, or three literals may be 1 in each clause, and so each
clause-labeled digit has a sum of 1, 2, or 3 from the vi  and 
  values in S ′. In
Figure 34.19  for example, literals ¬ x1 , ¬ x2 , and x3  have the value 1 in a
satisfying assignment. Each of clauses C1  and C4  contains exactly one of
these literals, and so together 
 , and v3  contribute 1 to the sum in the
digits for C1  and C4 . Clause C2  contains two of these literals, and 
 , and
v3  contribute 2 to the sum in the digit for C2 . Clause C3  contains all three of
these literals, and 
 , and v3  contribute 3 to the sum in the digit for C3 .
T o achieve the tar get of 4 in each digit labeled by clause Cj , include in S ′ the
appropriate nonempty subset of slack variables { sj , 
  }. In Figure 34.19 , S ′
includes s1 , 
 , s3 , s4 , and 
 . Since S ′ matches the tar get in all digits of the
sum, and no carries can occur , the values of S ′ sum to t .
Now suppose that some subset S ′ ⊆  S  sums to t . The subset S ′ must
include exactly one of vi  and 
  for each i  = 1, 2, … , n , for otherwise the
digits labeled by variables would not sum to 1. If vi  ∈  S ′, then set xi  = 1.
Otherwise, 
 , and set xi  = 0. W e claim that every clause Cj , for j  = 1, 2,
… , k , is satisfied by this assignment. T o prove this claim, note that to
achieve a sum of 4 in the digit labeled by Cj , the subset S ′ must include at
Page number: 1279
least one vi  or 
  value that has a 1 in the digit labeled by Cj , since the
contributions of the slack variables sj  and 
  together sum to at most 3. If S ′
includes a 
  that has a 1 in Cj ’ s position, then the literal xi  appears in clause
Cj . Since xi  = 1 when vi  ∈  S ′, clause Cj  is satisfied. If S ′ includes a 
  that
has a 1 in that position, then the literal ¬ xi  appears in Cj . Since xi  = 0 when 
 ∈  S ′, clause Cj  is again satisfied. Thus, all clauses of ϕ  are satisfied,
which completes the proof.
▪
34.5.6    Reduction strategies
From the reductions in this section, you can see that no single strategy
applies to all NP-complete problems. Some reductions are straightforward,
such as reducing the hamiltonian-cycle problem to the traveling-salesperson
problem. Others are considerably more complicated. Here are a few things
to keep in mind and some strategies that you can often bring to bear .
Pitfalls
Make sure that you don’ t get the reduction backward. That is, in trying to
show that problem Y  is NP-complete, you might take a known NP-complete
problem X  and give a polynomial-time reduction from Y  to X . That is the
wrong direction. The reduction should be from X  to Y , so that a solution to
Y  gives a solution to X .
Remember also that reducing a known NP-complete problem X  to a
problem Y  does not in itself prove that Y  is NP-complete. It proves that Y  is
NP-hard. In order to show that Y  is NP-complete, you additionally need to
prove that it’ s in NP by showing how to verify a certificate for Y  in
polynomial time.
Go fr om general to specific
When reducing problem X  to problem Y , you always have to start with an
arbitrary input to problem X . But you are allowed to restrict the input to
problem Y  as much as you like. For example, when reducing 3-CNF
satisfiability to the subset-sum problem, the reduction had to be able to
handle any  3-CNF formula as its input, but the input to the subset-sum
problem that it produced had a particular structure: 2 n  + 2 k  integers in the
Page number: 1280
set, and each integer was formed in a particular way . The reduction did not
need to produce every  possible input to the subset-sum problem. The point
is that one way to solve the 3-CNF satisfiability problem transforms the
input into an input to the subset-sum problem and then uses the answer to
the subset-sum problem as the answer to the 3-CNF satisfiability problem.
T ake advantage of structur e in the pr oblem you ar e r educing fr om
When you are choosing a problem to reduce from, you might consider two
problems in the same domain, but one problem has more structure than the
other . For example, it’ s almost always much easier to reduce from 3-CNF
satisfiability than to reduce from formula satisfiability . Boolean formulas
can be arbitrarily complicated, but you can exploit the structure of 3-CNF
formulas when reducing.
Likewise, it is usually more straightforward to reduce from the
hamiltonian-cycle problem than from the traveling-salesperson problem,
even though they are so similar . That’ s because you can view the
hamiltonian-cycle problem as taking a complete graph but with edge
weights of just 0 or 1, as they would appear in the adjacency matrix. In that
sense, the hamiltonian-cycle problem has more structure than the traveling-
salesperson problem, in which edge weights are unrestricted.
Look for special cases
Several NP-complete problems are just special cases of other NP-complete
problems. For example, consider the decision version of the 0-1 knapsack
problem: given a set of n  items, each with a weight and a value, does there
exist a subset of items whose total weight is at most a given weight W  and
whose total value is at least a given value V ? Y ou can view the set-partition
problem in Exercise 34.5-5 as a special case of the 0-1 knapsack problem:
let the value of each item equal its weight, and set both W  and V  to half the
total weight. If problem X  is NP-hard and it is a special case of problem Y ,
then problem Y  must be NP-hard as well. That is because a polynomial-time
solution for problem Y  automatically gives a polynomial-time solution for
problem X . More intuitively , problem Y , being more general than problem
X , is at least as hard.
Select an appr opriate pr oblem to r educe fr om
Page number: 1281
It’ s often a good strategy to reduce from a problem in a domain that is the
same as, or at least related to, the domain of the problem that you’re trying
to prove NP-complete. For example, we saw that the vertex-cover problem
—a graph problem—was NP-hard by reducing from the clique problem—
also a graph problem. From the vertex-cover problem, we reduced to the
hamiltonian-cycle problem, and from the hamiltonian-cycle problem, we
reduced to the traveling-salesperson problem. All of these problems take
undirected graphs as inputs.
Sometimes, however , you will find that is it better to cross over from
one domain to another , such as when we reduced from 3-CNF satisfiability
to the clique problem or to the subset-sum problem. 3-CNF satisfiability
often turns out to be a good choice as a problem to reduce from when
crossing domains.
W ithin graph problems, if you need to select a portion of the graph,
without regard to ordering, then the vertex-cover problem is often a good
place to start. If ordering matters, then consider starting from the
hamiltonian-cycle or hamiltonian-path problem (see Exercise 34.5-6).
Make big r ewards and big penalties
The strategy for reducing the hamiltonian-cycle problem with a graph G  to
the traveling-salesperson problem encouraged using edges present in G
when choosing edges for the traveling-salesperson tour . The reduction did
so by giving these edges a low weight: 0. In other words, we gave a big
reward for using these edges.
Alternatively , the reduction could have given the edges in G  a finite
weight and given edges not in G  infinite weight, thereby exacting a hefty
penalty for using edges not in G . W ith this approach, if each edge in G  has
weight W , then the tar get weight of the traveling-salesperson tour becomes
W  · | V |. Y ou can sometimes think of the penalties as a way to enforce
requirements. For example, if the traveling-salesperson tour includes an
edge with infinite weight, then it violates the requirement that the tour
should include only edges belonging to G .
Design gadgets
The reduction from the vertex-cover problem to the hamiltonian-cycle
problem uses the gadget shown in Figure 34.16 . This gadget is a subgraph
Page number: 1282
that is connected to other parts of the constructed graph in order to restrict
the ways that a cycle can visit each vertex in the gadget once. More
generally , a gadget is a component that enforces certain properties. Gadgets
can be complicated, as in the reduction to the hamiltonian-cycle problem.
Or they can be simple: in the reduction of 3-CNF satisfiability to the subset-
sum problem, you can view the slack variables sj  and 
  as gadgets enabling
each clause-labeled digit position to achieve the tar get value of 4.
Exer cises
34.5-1
The subgraph-isomorphism problem  takes two undirected graphs G1  and
G2 , and asks whether G1  is isomorphic to a subgraph of G2 . Show that the
subgraph-isomorphism problem is NP-complete.
34.5-2
Given an integer m  × n  matrix A  and an integer m -vector b , the 0-1 integer-
programming problem  asks whether there exists an integer n -vector x  with
elements in the set {0, 1} such that Ax  ≤ b . Prove that 0-1 integer
programming is NP-complete. ( Hint:  Reduce from 3-CNF-SA T .)
34.5-3
The integer linear-programming problem  is like the 0-1 integer -
programming problem given in Exercise 34.5-2, except that the values of
the vector x  may be any integers rather than just 0 or 1. Assuming that the
0-1 integer -programming problem is NP-hard, show that the integer linear -
programming problem is NP-complete.
34.5-4
Show how to solve the subset-sum problem in polynomial time if the tar get
value t  is expressed in unary .
34.5-5
The set-partition problem  takes as input a set S  of numbers. The question is
whether the numbers can be partitioned into two sets A  and A  = S  − A  such
that Σx ∈ A  x  = Σx ∈ A  x . Show that the set-partition problem is NP-complete.
34.5-6
Page number: 1283
Show that the hamiltonian-path problem is NP-complete.
34.5-7
The longest-simple-cycle problem  is the problem of determining a simple
cycle (no repeated vertices) of maximum length in a graph. Formulate a
related decision problem, and show that the decision problem is NP-
complete.
34.5-8
In the half 3-CNF satisfiability  problem, the input is a 3-CNF formula ϕ
with n  variables and m  clauses, where m  is even. The question is whether
there exists a truth assignment to the variables of ϕ  such that exactly half
the clauses evaluate to 0 and exactly half the clauses evaluate to 1. Prove
that the half 3-CNF satisfiability problem is NP-complete.
34.5-9
The proof that VER TEX-COVER ≤P  HAM-CYCLE assumes that the graph
G  given as input to the vertex-cover problem has no isolated vertices. Show
how the reduction in the proof can break down if G  has an isolated vertex.
Pr oblems
34-1     Independent set
An independent set  of a graph G  = ( V , E ) is a subset V ′ ⊆  V  of vertices such
that each edge in E  is incident on at most one vertex in V ′. The
independent-set problem  is to find a maximum-size independent set in G .
a.  Formulate a related decision problem for the independent-set problem,
and prove that it is NP-complete. ( Hint:  Reduce from the clique problem.)
b.  Y ou are given a “black-box” subroutine to solve the decision problem
you defined in part (a). Give an algorithm to find an independent set of
maximum size. The running time of your algorithm should be polynomial
in | V  | and | E |, counting queries to the black box as a single step.
Although the independent-set decision problem is NP-complete, certain
special cases are polynomial-time solvable.
Page number: 1284
c.  Give an ef ficient algorithm to solve the independent-set problem when
each vertex in G  has degree 2. Analyze the running time, and prove that
your algorithm works correctly .
d.  Give an ef ficient algorithm to solve the independent-set problem when G
is bipartite. Analyze the running time, and prove that your algorithm
works correctly . ( Hint:  First prove that in a bipartite graph, the size of the
maximimum independent set plus the size of the maximum matching is
equal to | V |. Then use a maximum-matching algorithm (see Section 25.1 )
as a first step in an algorithm to find an independent set.)
34-2     Bonnie and Clyde
Bonnie and Clyde have just robbed a bank. They have a bag of money and
want to divide it up. For each of the following scenarios, either give a
polynomial-time algorithm to divide the money or prove that the problem of
dividing the money in the manner described is NP-complete. The input in
each case is a list of the n  items in the bag, along with the value of each.
a.  The bag contains n  coins, but only two dif ferent denominations: some
coins are worth x  dollars, and some are worth y  dollars. Bonnie and Clyde
wish to divide the money exactly evenly .
b.  The bag contains n  coins, with an arbitrary number of dif ferent
denominations, but each denomination is a nonnegative exact power of 2,
so that the possible denominations are 1 dollar , 2 dollars, 4 dollars, etc.
Bonnie and Clyde wish to divide the money exactly evenly .
c.  The bag contains n  checks, which are, in an amazing coincidence, made
out to “Bonnie or Clyde.” They wish to divide the checks so that they
each get the exact same amount of money .
d.  The bag contains n  checks as in part (c), but this time Bonnie and Clyde
are willing to accept a split in which the dif ference is no lar ger than 100
dollars.
34-3     Graph coloring
Mapmakers try to use as few colors as possible when coloring countries on
a map, subject to the restriction that if two countries share a border , they
must have dif ferent colors. Y ou can model this problem with an undirected
Page number: 1285
graph G  = ( V , E ) in which each vertex represents a country and vertices
whose respective countries share a border are adjacent. Then, a k-coloring
is a function c  : V  → {1, 2, … , k } such that c ( u ) ≠ c ( v ) for every edge ( u , v )
∈  E . In other words, the numbers 1, 2, … , k  represent the k  colors, and
adjacent vertices must have dif ferent colors. The graph-coloring problem  is
to determine the minimum number of colors needed to color a given graph.
a.  Give an ef ficient algorithm to determine a 2-coloring of a graph, if one
exists.
b.  Cast the graph-coloring problem as a decision problem. Show that your
decision problem is solvable in polynomial time if and only if the graph-
coloring problem is solvable in polynomial time.
c.  Let the language 3-COLOR be the set of graphs that can be 3-colored.
Show that if 3-COLOR is NP-complete, then your decision problem from
part (b) is NP-complete.
Figur e 34.20  The subgraph of G  in Problem 34-3 formed by the literal edges. The special vertices
TRUE , F ALSE , and RED  form a triangle, and for each variable x i , the vertices x i , ¬ x i , and RED  form
a triangle.
Figur e 34.21  The gadget corresponding to a clause ( x  ∨  y  ∨  z ), used in Problem 34-3.
Page number: 1286
T o prove that 3-COLOR is NP-complete, you can reduce from 3-CNF-SA T .
Given a formula ϕ  of m  clauses on n  variables x1 , x2 , … , xn , construct a
graph G  = ( V , E ) as follows. The set V  consists of a vertex for each variable,
a vertex for the negation of each variable, five vertices for each clause, and
three special vertices: TRUE , F ALSE , and RED . The edges of the graph are of
two types: “literal” edges that are independent of the clauses and “clause”
edges that depend on the clauses. As Figure 34.20  shows, the literal edges
form a triangle on the three special vertices TRUE , F ALSE , and RED , and they
also form a triangle on xi , ¬ xi , and RED  for i  = 1, 2, … , n .
d.  Consider a graph containing the literal edges. Ar gue that in any 3-
coloring c  of such a graph, exactly one of a variable and its negation is
colored c ( TRUE ) and the other is colored c ( F ALSE ). Then ar gue that for any
truth assignment for ϕ , there exists a 3-coloring of the graph containing
just the literal edges.
The gadget shown in Figure 34.21  helps to enforce the condition
corresponding to a clause ( x  ∨  y  ∨  z ), where x , y , and z  are literals. Each
clause requires a unique copy of the five blue vertices in the figure. They
connect as shown to the literals of the clause and the special vertex TRUE .
e.  Ar gue that if each of x , y , and z  is colored c ( TRUE ) or c ( F ALSE ), then the
gadget is 3-colorable if and only if at least one of x , y , or z  is colored
c ( TRUE ).
f.  Complete the proof that 3-COLOR is NP-complete.
34-4     Scheduling with profits and deadlines
Y ou have one computer and a set of n  tasks { a1 , a2 , … , an } requiring time
on the computer . Each task aj  requires tj  time units on the computer (its
processing time), yields a profit of pj , and has a deadline dj . The computer
can process only one task at a time, and task aj  must run without
interruption for tj  consecutive time units. If task aj  completes by its deadline
dj , you receive a profit pj . If instead task aj  completes after its deadline, you
receive no profit. As an optimization problem, given the processing times,
profits, and deadlines for a set of n  tasks, you wish to find a schedule that
Page number: 1287
completes all the tasks and returns the greatest amount of profit. The
processing times, profits, and deadlines are all nonnegative numbers.
a.  State this problem as a decision problem.
b.  Show that the decision problem is NP-complete.
c.  Give a polynomial-time algorithm for the decision problem, assuming
that all processing times are integers from 1 to n . ( Hint:  Use dynamic
programming.)
d.  Give a polynomial-time algorithm for the optimization problem,
assuming that all processing times are integers from 1 to n .
Chapter notes
The book by Garey and Johnson [ 176 ] provides a wonderful guide to NP-
completeness, discussing the theory at length and providing a catalogue of
many problems that were known to be NP-complete in 1979. The proof of
Theorem 34.13 is adapted from their book, and the list of NP-complete
problem domains at the beginning of Section 34.5  is drawn from their table
of contents. Johnson wrote a series of 23 columns in the Journal of
Algorithms  between 1981 and 1992 reporting new developments in NP-
completeness. Fortnow’ s book [ 152 ] gives a history of NP-completeness,
along with societal implications. Hopcroft, Motwani, and Ullman [ 225 ],
Lewis and Papadimitriou [ 299 ], Papadimitriou [ 352 ], and Sipser [ 413 ] have
good treatments of NP-completeness in the context of complexity theory .
NP-completeness and several reductions also appear in books by Aho,
Hopcroft, and Ullman [ 5 ], Dasgupta, Papadimitriou, and V azirani [ 107 ],
Johnsonbaugh and Schaefer [ 239 ], and Kleinber g and T ardos [ 257 ]. The
book by Hromkovič [ 229 ] studies various methods for solving hard
problems.
The class P was introduced in 1964 by Cobham [ 96 ] and, independently ,
in 1965 by Edmonds [ 130 ], who also introduced the class NP and
conjectured that P ≠ NP . The notion of NP-completeness was proposed in
1971 by Cook [ 100 ], who gave the first NP-completeness proofs for
formula satisfiability and 3-CNF satisfiability . Levin [ 297 ] independently
discovered the notion, giving an NP-completeness proof for a tiling
problem. Karp [ 248 ] introduced the methodology of reductions in 1972 and
Page number: 1288
demonstrated the rich variety of NP-complete problems. Karp’ s paper
included the original NP-completeness proofs of the clique, vertex-cover ,
and hamiltonian-cycle problems. Since then, thousands of problems have
been proven to be NP-complete by many researchers.
W ork in complexity theory has shed light on the complexity of
computing approximate solutions. This work gives a new definition of NP
using “probabilistically checkable proofs.” This new definition implies that
for problems such as clique, vertex cover , the traveling-salesperson problem
with the triangle inequality , and many others, computing good approximate
solutions (see Chapter 35 ) is NP-hard and hence no easier than computing
optimal solutions. An introduction to this area can be found in Arora’ s
thesis [ 21 ], a chapter by Arora and Lund in Hochbaum [ 221 ], a survey
article by Arora [ 22 ], a book edited by Mayr , Prömel, and Steger [ 319 ], a
survey article by Johnson [ 237 ], and a chapter in the textbook by Arora and
Barak [ 24 ].
1 For the Halting Problem and other unsolvable problems, there are proofs that no algorithm can
exist that, for every input, eventually produces the correct answer . A procedure attempting to solve an
unsolvable problem might always produce an answer but is sometimes incorrect, or all the answers it
produces might be correct but for some inputs it never produces an answer .
2 See the books by Hopcroft and Ullman [ 228 ], Lewis and Papadimitriou [ 299 ], or Sipser [ 413 ] for a
thorough treatment of the T uring-machine model.
3 The codomain of e  need not be binary  strings: any set of strings over a finite alphabet having at
least two symbols will do.
4 W e assume that the algorithm’ s output is separate from its input. Because it takes at least one time
step to produce each bit of the output and the algorithm takes O ( T  ( n )) time steps, the size of the
output is O ( T  ( n )).
5 The notation {0, 1}* denotes the set of all strings composed of symbols from the set {0, 1}.
6 T echnically , we also require the functions f 12  and f 21  to “map noninstances to noninstances.” A
noninstance  of an encoding e  is a string x  ∈  {0, 1}* such that there is no instance i  for which e ( i ) =
x . W e require that f 12 ( x ) = y  for every noninstance x  of encoding e 1 , where y  is some noninstance of
e 2 , and that f 21 ( x ′) = y ′ for every noninstance x ′ of e 2 , where y ′ is some noninstance of e 1 .
7 For more on complexity classes, see the seminal paper by Hartmanis and Stearns [ 210 ].
8 In a letter dated 17 October 1856 to his friend John T . Graves, Hamilton [ 206 , p. 624] wrote, “I
have found that some young persons have been much amused by trying a new mathematical game
which the Icosion furnishes, one person sticking five pins in any five consecutive points … and the
other player then aiming to insert, which by the theory in this letter can always be done, fifteen other
Page number: 1289
pins, in cyclical succession, so as to cover all the other points, and to end in immediate proximity to
the pin wherewith his antagonist had begun.”
9 The name “NP” stands for “nondeterministic polynomial time.” The class NP was originally
studied in the context of nondeterminism, but this book uses the somewhat simpler yet equivalent
notion of verification. Hopcroft and Ullman [ 228 ] give a good presentation of NP-completeness in
terms of nondeterministic models of computation.
10 On the other hand, if the size of the circuit C  is Θ(2k), then an algorithm whose running time is
O (2k) has a running time that is polynomial in the circuit size. Even if P ≠ NP , this situation would
not contradict the NP-completeness of the problem. The existence of a polynomial-time algorithm for
a special case does not imply that there is a polynomial-time algorithm for all cases.
1 1 T echnically , a cycle is defined as a sequence of vertices rather than edges (see Section B.4 ). In the
interest of clarity , we abuse notation here and define the hamiltonian cycle by its edges.
12 In fact, any base b  ≥ 7 works. The instance at the beginning of this subsection is the set S  and
tar get t  in Figure 34.19  interpreted in base 7, with S  listed in sorted order .
Page number: 1290
35        Appr oximation Algorithms
Many problems of practical significance are NP-complete, yet they are too
important to abandon merely because nobody knows how to find an optimal
solution in polynomial time. Even if a problem is NP-complete, there may
be hope. Y ou have at least three options to get around NP-completeness.
First, if the actual inputs are small, an algorithm with exponential running
time might be fast enough. Second, you might be able to isolate important
special cases that you can solve in polynomial time. Third, you can try to
devise an approach to find a near -optimal  solution in polynomial time
(either in the worst case or the expected case). In practice, near -optimality is
often good enough. W e call an algorithm that returns near -optimal solutions
an approximation algorithm . This chapter presents polynomial-time
approximation algorithms for several NP-complete problems.
Performance ratios for appr oximation algorithms
Suppose that you are working on an optimization problem in which each
potential solution has a positive cost, and you want to find a near -optimal
solution. Depending on the problem, you could define an optimal solution
as one with maximum possible cost or as one with minimum possible cost,
which is to say that the problem might be either a maximization or a
minimization problem.
W e say that an algorithm for a problem has an approximation ratio  of
ρ ( n ) if, for any input of size n , the cost C  of the solution produced by the
algorithm is within a factor of ρ ( n ) of the cost C * of an optimal solution:

Page number: 1291
If an algorithm achieves an approximation ratio of ρ ( n ), we call it a ρ ( n ) -
approximation algorithm . The definitions of approximation ratio and ρ ( n )-
approximation algorithm apply to both minimization and maximization
problems. For a maximization problem, 0 < C  ≤ C *, and the ratio C */ C
gives the factor by which the cost of an optimal solution is lar ger than the
cost of the approximate solution. Similarly , for a minimization problem, 0 <
C * ≤ C , and the ratio C / C * gives the factor by which the cost of the
approximate solution is lar ger than the cost of an optimal solution. Because
we assume that all solutions have positive cost, these ratios are always well
defined. The approximation ratio of an approximation algorithm is never
less than 1, since C / C * ≤ 1 implies C */ C  ≥ 1. Therefore, a 1-approximation
algorithm1 produces an optimal solution, and an approximation algorithm
with a lar ge approximation ratio may return a solution that is much worse
than optimal.
For many problems, we know of polynomial-time approximation
algorithms with small constant approximation ratios, although for other
problems, the best known polynomial-time approximation algorithms have
approximation ratios that grow as functions of the input size n . An example
of such a problem is the set-cover problem presented in Section 35.3 .
Some polynomial-time approximation algorithms can achieve
increasingly better approximation ratios by using more and more
computation time. For such problems, you can trade computation time for
the quality of the approximation. An example is the subset-sum problem
studied in Section 35.5 . This situation is important enough to deserve a
name of its own.
An approximation scheme  for an optimization problem is an
approximation algorithm that takes as input not only an instance of the
problem, but also a value ϵ  > 0 such that for any fixed ϵ , the scheme is a (1
+ ϵ )-approximation algorithm. W e say that an approximation scheme is a
polynomial-time approximation scheme  if for any fixed ϵ  > 0, the scheme
runs in time polynomial in the size n  of its input instance.
The running time of a polynomial-time approximation scheme can
increase very rapidly as ϵ  decreases. For example, the running time of a
polynomial-time approximation scheme might be O ( n2/ ϵ). Ideally , if ϵ
decreases by a constant factor , the running time to achieve the desired
approximation should not increase by more than a constant factor (though
not necessarily the same constant factor by which ϵ  decreased).
Page number: 1292
W e say that an approximation scheme is a fully polynomial-time
approximation scheme  if it is an approximation scheme and its running
time is polynomial in both 1/ ϵ  and the size n  of the input instance. For
example, the scheme might have a running time of O ((1/ ϵ )2n3). W ith such a
scheme, any constant-factor decrease in ϵ  comes with a corresponding
constant-factor increase in the running time.
Chapter outline
The first four sections of this chapter present some examples of polynomial-
time approximation algorithms for NP-complete problems, and the fifth
section gives a fully polynomial-time approximation scheme. W e begin in
Section 35.1  with a study of the vertex-cover problem, an NP-complete
minimization problem that has an approximation algorithm with an
approximation ratio of 2. Section 35.2  looks at a version of the traveling-
salesperson problem in which the cost function satisfies the triangle
inequality and presents an approximation algorithm with an approximation
ratio of 2. The section also shows that without the triangle inequality , for
any constant ρ  ≥ 1, a ρ -approximation algorithm cannot exist unless P = NP .
Section 35.3  applies a greedy method as an ef fective approximation
algorithm for the set-covering problem, obtaining a covering whose cost is
at worst a logarithmic factor lar ger than the optimal cost. Section 35.4  uses
randomization and linear programming to develop two more approximation
algorithms. The section first defines the optimization version of 3-CNF
satisfiability and gives a simple randomized algorithm that produces a
solution with an expected approximation ratio of 8/7. Then Section 35.4
examines a weighted variant of the vertex-cover problem and exhibits how
to use linear programming to develop a 2-approximation algorithm. Finally ,
Section 35.5  presents a fully polynomial-time approximation scheme for the
subset-sum problem.
35.1    The vertex-cover pr oblem
Section 34.5.2  defined the vertex-cover problem and proved it NP-
complete. Recall that a vertex cover  of an undirected graph G  = ( V , E ) is a
subset V ′ ⊆  V  such that if ( u , v ) is an edge of G , then either u  ∈  V ′ or v  ∈
V ′ (or both). The size of a vertex cover is the number of vertices in it.
Page number: 1293
The vertex-cover problem  is to find a vertex cover of minimum size in a
given undirected graph. W e call such a vertex cover an optimal vertex
cover . This problem is the optimization version of an NP-complete decision
problem.
Even though nobody knows how to find an optimal vertex cover in a
graph G  in polynomial time, there is an ef ficient algorithm to find a vertex
cover that is near -optimal. The approximation algorithm A PPROX -V ER TEX -
C OVER  on the facing page takes as input an undirected graph G  and returns
a vertex cover whose size is guaranteed to be no more than twice the size of
an optimal vertex cover .
Figure 35.1  illustrates how A PPROX -V ER TEX -C OVER  operates on an
example graph. The variable C  contains the vertex cover being constructed.
Line 1 initializes C  to the empty set. Line 2 sets E ′ to be a copy of the edge
set G.E  of the graph. The while  loop of lines 3–6 repeatedly picks an edge
( u , v ) from E ′, adds its endpoints u  and v  into C , and deletes all edges in E ′
that u  or v  covers. Finally , line 7 returns the vertex cover C . The running
time of this algorithm is O ( V  + E ), using adjacency lists to represent E ′.
A PPROX -V ER TEX -C OVER  ( G )
1 C  = Ø
2 E ′ = G.E
3 while  E ′ ≠ Ø
4 let ( u , v ) be an arbitrary edge of E ′
5 C  = C  ∪  { u, v }
6 remove from E ′ edge ( u , v ) and every edge incident on either u  or v
7 r eturn  C
Theorem 35.1
A PPROX -V ER TEX -C OVER  is a polynomial-time 2-approximation algorithm.
Proof    W e have already shown that A PPROX -V ER TEX -C OVER  runs in
polynomial time.
The set C  of vertices that is returned by A PPROX -V ER TEX -C OVER  is a
vertex cover , since the algorithm loops until every edge in G.E  has been
covered by some vertex in C .
T o see that A PPROX -V ER TEX -C OVER  returns a vertex cover that is at most
twice the size of an optimal cover , let A  denote the set of edges that line 4 of
A PPROX -V ER TEX -C OVER  picked. In order to cover the edges in A , any vertex
Page number: 1294
cover—in particular , an optimal cover C *—must include at least one
endpoint of each edge in A . No two edges in A  share an endpoint, since
once an edge is picked in line 4, all other edges that are incident on its
endpoints are deleted from E ′ in line 6. Thus, no two edges in A  are covered
by the same vertex from C *, meaning that for every vertex in C *, there is at
most one edge in A , giving the lower bound
on the size of an optimal vertex cover . Each execution of line 4 picks an
edge for which neither of its endpoints is already in C , yielding an upper
bound (an exact upper bound, in fact) on the size of the vertex cover
returned:
Combining equations (35.2) and (35.3) yields
| C | = 2 | A |
≤ 2 | C *|,
thereby proving the theorem.
▪
Page number: 1295
Figur e 35.1  The operation of A PPROX -V ER TEX -C OVER . (a)  The input graph G , which has 7
vertices and 8 edges. (b)  The highlighted edge ( b , c ) is the first edge chosen by A PPROX -V ER TEX -
C OVER . V ertices b  and c , in blue, are added to the set C  containing the vertex cover being created.
Dashed edges ( a , b ), ( c , e ), and ( c , d ) are removed since they are now covered by some vertex in C .
(c)  Edge ( e , f ) is chosen, and vertices e  and f  are added to C . (d)  Edge ( d , g ) is chosen, and vertices d
and g  are added to C . (e)  The set C , which is the vertex cover produced by A PPROX -V ER TEX -
C OVER , contains the six vertices b, c, d, e, f, g . (f)  The optimal vertex cover for this problem
contains only three vertices: b , d , and e .
Let us reflect on this proof. At first, you might wonder how you can
possibly prove that the size of the vertex cover returned by A PPROX -
V ER TEX -C OVER  is at most twice the size of an optimal vertex cover , when
you don’ t even know the size of an optimal vertex cover . Instead of
requiring that you know the exact size of an optimal vertex cover , you find
a lower bound on the size. As Exercise 35.1-2 asks you to show , the set A  of
edges that line 4 of A PPROX -V ER TEX -C OVER  selects is actually a maximal
matching in the graph G . (A maximal matching  is a matching to which no
edges can be added and still have a matching.) The size of a maximal
matching is, as we ar gued in the proof of Theorem 35.1, a lower bound on
the size of an optimal vertex cover . The algorithm returns a vertex cover
whose size is at most twice the size of the maximal matching A . The
Page number: 1296
approximation ratio comes from relating the size of the solution returned to
the lower bound. W e will use this methodology in later sections as well.
Exer cises
35.1-1
Give an example of a graph for which A PPROX -V ER TEX -C OVER  always
yields a suboptimal solution.
35.1-2
Prove that the set of edges picked in line 4 of A PPROX -V ER TEX -C OVER  forms
a maximal matching in the graph G .
★  35.1-3
Consider the following heuristic to solve the vertex-cover problem.
Repeatedly select a vertex of highest degree, and remove all of its incident
edges. Give an example to show that this heuristic does not provide an
approximation ratio of 2. ( Hint:  T ry a bipartite graph with vertices of
uniform degree on the left and vertices of varying degree on the right.)
35.1-4
Give an ef ficient greedy algorithm that finds an optimal vertex cover for a
tree in linear time.
35.1-5
The proof of Theorem 34.12 on page 1084 illustrates that the vertex-cover
problem and the NP-complete clique problem are complementary in the
sense that an optimal vertex cover is the complement of a maximum-size
clique in the complement graph. Does this relationship imply that there is a
polynomial-time approximation algorithm with a constant approximation
ratio for the clique problem? Justify your answer .
35.2    The traveling-salesperson pr oblem
The input to the traveling-salesperson problem, introduced in Section
34.5.4 , is a complete undirected graph G  = ( V , E ) that has a nonnegative
integer cost c ( u, v ) associated with each edge ( u , v ) ∈  E . The goal is to find
Page number: 1297
a hamiltonian cycle (a tour) of G  with minimum cost. As an extension of
our notation, let c ( A ) denote the total cost of the edges in the subset A  ⊆  E :
In many practical situations, the least costly way to go from a place u  to
a place w  is to go directly , with no intermediate steps. Put another way ,
cutting out an intermediate stop never increases the cost. Such a cost
function c  satisfies the triangle inequality : for all vertices u, v , w  ∈  V ,
c ( u, w ) ≤ c ( u, v ) + c ( v , w ).
The triangle inequality seems as though it should naturally hold, and it is
automatically satisfied in several applications. For example, if the vertices
of the graph are points in the plane and the cost of traveling between two
vertices is the ordinary euclidean distance between them, then the triangle
inequality is satisfied. Furthermore, many cost functions other than
euclidean distance satisfy the triangle inequality .
As Exercise 35.2-2 shows, the traveling-salesperson problem is NP-
complete even if you require the cost function to satisfy the triangle
inequality . Thus, you should not expect to find a polynomial-time algorithm
for solving this problem exactly . Y our time would be better spent looking
for good approximation algorithms.
In Section 35.2.1 , we examine a 2-approximation algorithm for the
traveling-salesperson problem with the triangle inequality . In Section
35.2.2 , we show that without the triangle inequality , a polynomial-time
approximation algorithm with a constant approximation ratio does not exist
unless P = NP .
35.2.1    The traveling-salesperson pr oblem with the triangle inequality
Applying the methodology of the previous section, start by computing a
structure—a minimum spanning tree—whose weight gives a lower bound
on the length of an optimal traveling-salesperson tour . Then use the
minimum spanning tree to create a tour whose cost is no more than twice
that of the minimum spanning tree’ s weight, as long as the cost function
satisfies the triangle inequality . The procedure A PPROX -TSP-T OUR  on the
next page implements this approach, calling the minimum-spanning-tree
algorithm MST -P RIM  on page 596 as a subroutine. The parameter G  is a
Page number: 1298
complete undirected graph, and the cost function c  satisfies the triangle
inequality .
Recall from Section 12.1  that a preorder tree walk recursively visits
every vertex in the tree, listing a vertex when it is first encountered, before
visiting any of its children.
Figure 35.2  illustrates the operation of A PPROX -TSP-T OUR . Part (a) of
the figure shows a complete undirected graph, and part (b) shows the
minimum spanning tree T  grown from root vertex a  by MST -P RIM . Part (c)
shows how a preorder walk of T  visits the vertices, and part (d) displays the
corresponding tour , which is the tour returned by A PPROX -TSP-T OUR . Part
(e) displays an optimal tour , which is about 23% shorter .
Page number: 1299
Figur e 35.2  The operation of A PPROX -TSP-T OUR . (a)  A complete undirected graph. V ertices lie
on intersections of integer grid lines. For example, f  is one unit to the right and two units up from h .
The cost function between two points is the ordinary euclidean distance. (b)  A minimum spanning
tree T  of the complete graph, as computed by MST -P RIM . V ertex a  is the root vertex. Only edges in
the minimum spanning tree are shown. The vertices happen to be labeled in such a way that they are
added to the main tree by MST -P RIM  in alphabetical order . (c)  A walk of T , starting at a . A full walk
of the tree visits the vertices in the order a, b, c, b, h, b, a, d, e, f, e, g, e, d, a . A preorder walk of T
lists a vertex just when it is first encountered, as indicated by the dot next to each vertex, yielding the
ordering a, b, c, h, d, e, f, g . (d)  A tour obtained by visiting the vertices in the order given by the
preorder walk, which is the tour H  returned by A PPROX -TSP-T OUR . Its total cost is approximately
19.074. (e)  An optimal tour H * for the original complete graph. Its total cost is approximately
14.715.
A PPROX -TSP-T OUR  ( G , c )
1 select a vertex r  ∈  G.V  to be a “root” vertex
2 compute a minimum spanning tree T  for G  from root r  
using MST -P RIM  ( G , c, r )
3 let H  be a list of vertices, ordered according to when they are first visited in a preorder tree
walk of T
4 r eturn  the hamiltonian cycle H
Page number: 1300
By Exercise 21.2-2, even with a simple implementation of MST -P RIM ,
the running time of A PPROX -TSP-T OUR  is Θ( V  2). W e now show that if the
cost function for an instance of the traveling-salesperson problem satisfies
the triangle inequality , then A PPROX -TSP-T OUR  returns a tour whose cost is
at most twice the cost of an optimal tour .
Theorem 35.2
When the triangle inequality holds, A PPROX -TSP-T OUR  is a polynomial-
time 2-approximation algorithm for the traveling-salesperson problem.
Proof    W e have already seen that A PPROX -TSP-T OUR  runs in polynomial
time.
Let H * denote an optimal tour for the given set of vertices. Deleting any
edge from a tour yields a spanning tree, and each edge cost is nonnegative.
Therefore, the weight of the minimum spanning tree T  computed in line 2
of A PPROX -TSP-T OUR  provides a lower bound on the cost of an optimal
tour:
A full walk  of T  lists the vertices when they are first visited and also
whenever they are returned to after a visit to a subtree. Let’ s call this full
walk W . The full walk of our example gives the order
a, b, c, b, h, b, a, d, e, f, e, g, e, d, a.
Since the full walk traverses every edge of T  exactly twice, by extending
the definition of the cost c  in the natural manner to handle multisets of
edges, we have
Inequality (35.4) and equation (35.5) imply that
and so the cost of W  is within a factor of 2 of the cost of an optimal tour .
Of course, the full walk W  is not a tour , since it visits some vertices
more than once. By the triangle inequality , however , deleting a visit to any
vertex from W  does not increase the cost. (When a vertex v  is deleted from
W  between visits to u  and w , the resulting ordering specifies going directly
from u  to w .) Repeatedly apply this operation on each visit to a vertex after
Page number: 1301
the first time it’ s visited in W , so that W  is left with only the first visit to
each vertex. In our example, this process leaves the ordering
a, b, c, h, d, e, f, g.
This ordering is the same as that obtained by a preorder walk of the tree T .
Let H  be the cycle corresponding to this preorder walk. It is a hamiltonian
cycle, since every vertex is visited exactly once, and in fact it is the cycle
computed by A PPROX -TSP-T OUR . Since H  is obtained by deleting vertices
from the full walk W , we have
Combining inequalities (35.6) and (35.7) gives c ( H ) ≤ 2 c ( H *), which
completes the proof.
▪
Despite the small approximation ratio provided by Theorem 35.2,
A PPROX -TSP-T OUR  is usually not the best practical choice for this problem.
There are other approximation algorithms that typically perform much
better in practice. (See the references at the end of this chapter .)
35.2.2    The general traveling-salesperson pr oblem
When the cost function c  does not satisfy the triangle inequality , there is no
way to find good approximate tours in polynomial time unless P = NP .
Theorem 35.3
If P ≠ NP , then for any constant ρ  ≥ 1, there is no polynomial-time
approximation algorithm with approximation ratio ρ  for the general
traveling-salesperson problem.
Proof    The proof is by contradiction. Suppose to the contrary that for some
number ρ  ≥ 1, there is a polynomial-time approximation algorithm A  with
approximation ratio ρ . W ithout loss of generality , assume that ρ  is an
integer , by rounding it up if necessary . W e will show how to use A  to solve
instances of the hamiltonian-cycle problem (defined in Section 34.2 ) in
polynomial time. Since Theorem 34.13 on page 1085 says that the
hamiltonian-cycle problem is NP-complete, Theorem 34.4 on page 1063
implies that if it has a polynomial-time algorithm, then P = NP .
Page number: 1302
Let G  = ( V , E ) be an instance of the hamiltonian-cycle problem. W e will
show how to determine ef ficiently whether G  contains a hamiltonian cycle
by making use of the hypothesized approximation algorithm A . Convert G
into an instance of the traveling-salesperson problem as follows. Let G ′ =
( V , E ′) be the complete graph on V , that is,
E ′ = {( u , v ) : u, v  ∈  V  and u  ≠ v }.
Assign an integer cost to each edge in E ′ as follows:
Given a representation of G , it takes time polynomial in | V | and | E | to create
representations of G ′ and c .
Now consider the traveling-salesperson problem ( G ′, c ). If the original
graph G  has a hamiltonian cycle H , then the cost function c  assigns to each
edge of H  a cost of 1, and so ( G ′, c ) contains a tour of cost | V |. On the other
hand, if G  does not contain a hamiltonian cycle, then any tour of G ′ must
use some edge not in E . But any tour that uses an edge not in E  has a cost of
at least
( ρ  | V | + 1) + (| V | − 1) = ρ  | V | + | V |
> ρ  | V |.
Because edges not in G  are so costly , there is a gap of at least ρ | V | between
the cost of a tour that is a hamiltonian cycle in G  (cost | V |) and the cost of
any other tour (cost at least ρ | V | + | V |). Therefore, the cost of a tour that is
not a hamiltonian cycle in G  is at least a factor of ρ  + 1 greater than the cost
of a tour that is a hamiltonian cycle in G .
What happens upon applying the approximation algorithm A  to the
traveling-salesperson problem ( G ′, c )? Because A  is guaranteed to return a
tour of cost no more than ρ  times the cost of an optimal tour , if G  contains a
hamiltonian cycle, then A  must return it. If G  has no hamiltonian cycle, then
A  returns a tour of cost more than ρ  | V |. Therefore, using A  solves the
hamiltonian-cycle problem in polynomial time.
▪
The proof of Theorem 35.3 serves as an example of a general technique
to prove that no good approximation algorithm exists for a particular
Page number: 1303
problem. Given an NP-hard decision problem X , produce in polynomial
time a minimization problem Y  such that “yes” instances of X  correspond to
instances of Y  with value at most k  (for some k ), but that “no” instances of X
correspond to instances of Y  with value greater than ρk . This technique
shows that, unless P = NP , there is no polynomial-time ρ -approximation
algorithm for problem Y .
Exer cises
35.2-1
Let G  = ( V , E ) be a complete undirected graph containing at least 3 vertices,
and let c  be a cost function that satisfies the triangle inequality . Prove that
c ( u, v ) ≥ 0 for all u, v  ∈  V .
35.2-2
Show how in polynomial time to transform one instance of the traveling-
salesperson problem into another instance whose cost function satisfies the
triangle inequality . The two instances must have the same set of optimal
tours. Explain why such a polynomial-time transformation does not
contradict Theorem 35.3, assuming that P ≠ NP .
35.2-3
Consider the following closest-point heuristic  for building an approximate
traveling-salesperson tour whose cost function satisfies the triangle
inequality . Begin with a trivial cycle consisting of a single arbitrarily
chosen vertex. At each step, identify the vertex u  that is not on the cycle but
whose distance to any vertex on the cycle is minimum. Suppose that the
vertex on the cycle that is nearest u  is vertex v . Extend the cycle to include
u  by inserting u  just after v . Repeat until all vertices are on the cycle. Prove
that this heuristic returns a tour whose total cost is not more than twice the
cost of an optimal tour .
35.2-4
A solution to the bottleneck traveling-salesperson problem  is the
hamiltonian cycle that minimizes the cost of the most costly edge in the
cycle. Assuming that the cost function satisfies the triangle inequality , show
that there exists a polynomial-time approximation algorithm with
approximation ratio 3 for this problem. ( Hint:  Show recursively how to visit
Page number: 1304
all the nodes in a bottleneck spanning tree, as discussed in Problem 21-4 on
page 601, exactly once by taking a full walk of the tree and skipping nodes,
but without skipping more than two consecutive intermediate nodes. Show
that the costliest edge in a bottleneck spanning tree has a cost bounded from
above by the cost of the costliest edge in a bottleneck hamiltonian cycle.)
35.2-5
Suppose that the vertices for an instance of the traveling-salesperson
problem are points in the plane and that the cost c ( u, v ) is the euclidean
distance between points u  and v . Show that an optimal tour never crosses
itself.
35.2-6
Adapt the proof of Theorem 35.3 to show that for any constant c  ≥ 0, there
is no polynomial-time approximation algorithm with approximation ratio
| V |c for the general traveling-salesperson problem.
35.3    The set-covering pr oblem
The set-covering problem is an optimization problem that models many
problems that require resources to be allocated. Its corresponding decision
problem generalizes the NP-complete vertex-cover problem and is therefore
also NP-hard. The approximation algorithm developed to handle the vertex-
cover problem doesn’ t apply here, however . Instead, this section
investigates a simple greedy heuristic with a logarithmic approximation
ratio. That is, as the size of the instance gets lar ger , the size of the
approximate solution may grow , relative to the size of an optimal solution.
Because the logarithm function grows rather slowly , however , this
approximation algorithm may nonetheless give useful results.
An instance ( X , ℱ ) of the set-covering problem  consists of a finite set X
and a family ℱ  of subsets of X , such that every element of X  belongs to at
least one subset in ℱ :
W e say that a subfamily C  ⊆  ℱ  covers  a set of elements U  if
Page number: 1305
The problem is to find a minimum-size subfamily C  ⊆  ℱ  whose members
cover all of X :
Figure 35.3  illustrates the set-covering problem. The size of C  is the
number of sets it contains, rather than the number of individual elements in
these sets, since every subfamily C  that covers X  must contain all | X |
individual elements. In Figure 35.3 , the minimum set cover has size 3.
The set-covering problem abstracts many commonly arising
combinatorial problems. As a simple example, suppose that X  represents a
set of skills that are needed to solve a problem and that you have a given set
of people available to work on the problem. Y ou wish to form a committee,
containing as few people as possible, such that for every requisite skill in X ,
at least one member of the committee has that skill. The decision version of
the set-covering problem asks whether a covering exists with size at most k ,
where k  is an additional parameter specified in the problem instance. The
decision version of the problem is NP-complete, as Exercise 35.3-2 asks
you to show .
A gr eedy appr oximation algorithm
The greedy method in the procedure G REEDY -S ET -C OVER  on the facing page
works by picking, at each stage, the set S  that covers the greatest number of
remaining elements that are uncovered. In the example of Figure 35.3 ,
G REEDY -S ET -C OVER  adds to C , in order , the sets S1 , S4 , and S5 , followed by
either S3  or S6 .
Page number: 1306
Figur e 35.3  An instance ( X , ℱ ) of the set-covering problem, where X  consists of the 12 tan points
and ℱ  = { S 1 , S 2 , S 3 , S 4 , S 5 , S 6 , S 4 , S 5 }, Each set S i  ∈  ℱ  is outlined in blue. A minimum-size set
cover C  = { S 3 , S 4 , S 5 }, with size 3. The greedy algorithm produces a cover of size 4 by selecting
either the sets S 1 , S 4 , S 5 , and S 3  or the sets S 1 , S 4 , S 5 , and S 6 , in order .
G REEDY -S ET -C OVER  ( X , ℱ )
1 U 0  = X
2 C  = Ø
3 i  = 0
4 while  U i  ≠ Ø
5 select S  ∈  ℱ  that maximizes | S  ∩ U i |
6 U i +1  = U i  − S
7 C  = C  ∪  { S }
8 i  = i  + 1
9 r eturn  C
The greedy algorithm works as follows. At the start of each iteration, Ui
is a subset of X  containing the remaining uncovered elements, with the
initial subset U0  containing all the elements in X . The set C  contains the
subfamily being constructed. Line 5 is the greedy decision-making step,
choosing a subset S  that covers as many uncovered elements as possible
(breaking ties arbitrarily). After S  is selected, line 6 updates the set of
remaining uncovered elements, denoting it by Ui +1 , and line 7 places S  into
C . When the algorithm terminates, C  is a subfamily of ℱ  that covers X .
Page number: 1307
Analysis
W e now show that the greedy algorithm returns a set cover that is not too
much lar ger than an optimal set cover .
Theorem 35.4
The procedure G REEDY -S ET -C OVER  run on a set X  and family of subsets ℱ
is a polynomial-time O (lg X )-approximation algorithm.
Proof    Let’ s first show that the algorithm runs in time that is polynomial in
| X | and | ℱ |. The number of iterations of the loop in lines 4–7 is bounded
above by min {| X |, | ℱ |} = O (| X | + | ℱ |). The loop body can be implemented
to run in O (| X |·| ℱ |) time. Thus the algorithm runs in O (| X |·| ℱ |·(| X |+| ℱ |))
time, which is polynomial in the input size. (Exercise 35.3-3 asks for a
linear -time algorithm.)
T o prove the approximation bound, let C * be an optimal set cover for
the original instance ( X , ℱ ), and let k  = | C *|. Since C * is also a set cover of
each subset Ui  of X  constructed by the algorithm, we know that any subset
Ui  constructed by the algorithm can be covered by k  sets. Therefore, if ( Ui ,
ℱ ) is an instance of the set-covering problem, its optimal set cover has size
at most k .
If an optimal set cover for an instance ( Ui , ℱ ) has size at most k , at least
one of the sets in C  covers at least | Ui |/ k  new elements. Thus, line 5 of
G REEDY -S ET -C OVER , which chooses a set with the maximum number of
uncovered elements, must choose a set in which the number of newly
covered elements is at least | Ui |/ k . These elements are removed when
constructing Ui +1 , giving
Iterating inequality (35.8) gives
| U 0 | = | X |,
| U 1 | ≤ | U 0 | (1 − 1/ k ),
| U 2 | ≤| U 1 | (1 − 1/ k ) = | U | (1 − 1/ k )2,
and in general
Page number: 1308
The algorithm stops when Ui  = Ø, which means that | Ui | < 1. Thus an upper
bound on the number of iterations of the algorithm is the smallest value of i
for which | Ui | < 1.
Since 1 + x  ≤ ex for all real x  (see inequality (3.14) on page 66), by
letting x  = −1/ k , we have 1 − 1/ k  ≤ e−1/ k, so that (1 − 1/ k )k ≤ ( e−1/ k)k = 1/ e .
Denoting the number i  of iterations by ck  for some nonnegative integer c ,
we want c  such that
Multiplying both sides by ec and then taking the natural logarithm of both
sides gives c  ≥ ln | X |, so we can choose for c  any integer that is at least ln
| X |. W e choose c  = ⌈ ln | X | ⌉ . Since i  = ck  is an upper bound on the number of
iterations, which equals the size of C , and k  = | C *|, we have | C | ≤ i  = ck  = c
| C *| = | C *| ⌈ ln | X | ⌉ , and the theorem follows.
▪
Exer cises
35.3-1
Consider each of the following words as a set of letters: { arid , dash ,
drain , heard , lost , nose , shun , slate , snare , thread }. Show
which set cover G REEDY -S ET -C OVER  produces when you break ties in favor
of the word that appears first in the dictionary .
35.3-2
Show that the decision version of the set-covering problem is NP-complete
by reducing the vertex-cover problem to it.
35.3-3
Show how to implement G REEDY -S ET -C OVER  to run in O (ΣS ∈ ℱ  | S |) time.
35.3-4
The proof of Theorem 35.4 says that when G REEDY -S ET -C OVER , run on the
instance ( X , ℱ ), returns the subfamily C , then | C | ≤ | C *| ⌈ ln X ⌉ . Show that
the following weaker bound is trivially true:
Page number: 1309
| C | ≤ | C *| max {| S | : S  ∈  ℱ }.
35.3-5
G REEDY -S ET -C OVER  can return a number of dif ferent solutions, depending
on how it breaks ties in line 5. Give a procedure B AD -S ET -C OVER -I NST ANCE
( n ) that returns an n -element instance of the set-covering problem for
which, depending on how line 5 breaks ties, G REEDY -S ET -C OVER  can return
a number of dif ferent solutions that is exponential in n .
35.4    Randomization and linear pr ogramming
This section studies two useful techniques for designing approximation
algorithms: randomization and linear programming. It starts with a simple
randomized algorithm for an optimization version of 3-CNF satisfiability ,
and then it shows how to design an approximation algorithm for a weighted
version of the vertex-cover problem based on linear programming. This
section only scratches the surface of these two powerful techniques. The
chapter notes give references for further study of these areas.
A randomized appr oximation algorithm for MAX-3-CNF satisfiability
Just as some randomized algorithms compute exact solutions, some
randomized algorithms compute approximate solutions. W e say that a
randomized algorithm for a problem has an approximation ratio  of ρ ( n ) if,
for any input of size n , the expected  cost C  of the solution produced by the
randomized algorithm is within a factor of ρ ( n ) of the cost C * of an optimal
solution:
W e call a randomized algorithm that achieves an approximation ratio of
ρ ( n ) a randomized ρ ( n ) -approximation algorithm.  In other words, a
randomized approximation algorithm is like a deterministic approximation
algorithm, except that the approximation ratio is for an expected cost.
A particular instance of 3-CNF satisfiability , as defined in Section 34.4 ,
may or may not be satisfiable. In order to be satisfiable, there must exist an
assignment of the variables so that every clause evaluates to 1. If an
Page number: 1310
instance is not satisfiable, you might instead want to know how “close” to
satisfiable it is, that is, find an assignment of the variables that satisfies as
many clauses as possible. W e call the resulting maximization problem
MAX-3-CNF satisfiability . The input to MAX-3-CNF satisfiability is the
same as for 3-CNF satisfiability , and the goal is to return an assignment of
the variables that maximizes the number of clauses evaluating to 1. Y ou
might be surprised that randomly setting each variable to 1 with probability
1/2 and to 0 with probability 1/2 yields a randomized 8/7-approximation
algorithm, but we’re about to see why . Recall that the definition of 3-CNF
satisfiability from Section 34.4  requires each clause to consist of exactly
three distinct literals. W e now further assume that no clause contains both a
variable and its negation. Exercise 35.4-1 asks you to remove this last
assumption.
Theorem 35.5
Given an instance of MAX-3-CNF satisfiability with n  variables x1 , x2 , … ,
xn  and m  clauses, the randomized algorithm that independently sets each
variable to 1 with probability 1/2 and to 0 with probability 1/2 is a
randomized 8/7-approximation algorithm.
Proof    Suppose that each variable is independently set to 1 with probability
1/2 and to 0 with probability 1/2. Define, for i  = 1, 2, … , m , the indicator
random variable
Yi  = I {clause i  is satisfied},
so that Yi  = 1 as long as at least one of the literals in the i th clause is set to
1. Since no literal appears more than once in the same clause, and since we
assume that no variable and its negation appear in the same clause, the
settings of the three literals in each clause are independent. A clause is not
satisfied only if all three of its literals are set to 0, and so Pr {clause i  is not
satisfied} = (1/2)3 = 1/8. Thus, we have Pr {clause i  is satisfied} = 1 − 1/8 =
7/8, and Lemma 5.1 on page 130 gives E [ Yi ] = 7/8. Let Y  be the number of
satisfied clauses overall, so that Y  = Y1  + Y2  + ⋯  + Ym . Then, we have
Page number: 1311
Since m  is an upper bound on the number of satisfied clauses, the
approximation ratio is at most m /(7 m /8) = 8/7.
▪
Appr oximating weighted vertex cover using linear pr ogramming
The minimum-weight vertex-cover problem  takes as input an undirected
graph G  = ( V , E ) in which each vertex v  ∈  V  has an associated positive
weight w ( v ). The weight w ( V ′) of a vertex cover V ′ ⊆  V  is the sum of the
weights of its vertices: w ( V ′) = Σv ∈ V′  w ( v ). The goal is to find a vertex cover
of minimum weight.
The approximation algorithm for unweighted vertex cover from Section
35.1  won’ t work here, because the solution it returns could be far from
optimal for the weighted problem. Instead, we’ll first compute a lower
bound on the weight of the minimum-weight vertex cover , by using a linear
program. Then we’ll “round” this solution and use it to obtain a vertex
cover .
Start by associating a variable x ( v ) with each vertex v  ∈  V , and require
that x ( v ) equals either 0 or 1 for each v  ∈  V . The vertex cover includes v  if
and only if x ( v ) = 1. Then the constraint that for any edge ( u , v ), at least one
of u  and v  must belong to the vertex cover can be expressed as x ( u ) + x ( v ) ≥
1. This view gives rise to the following 0-1 integer program  for finding a
minimum-weight vertex cover:
subject to
Page number: 1312
In the special case in which all the weights w ( v ) equal 1, this
formulation is the optimization version of the NP-hard vertex-cover
problem. Let’ s remove the constraint that x ( v ) ∈  {0, 1} and replace it by 0
≤ x ( v ) ≤ 1, resulting in the following linear program:
subject to
W e refer to this linear program as the linear-programming relaxation . Any
feasible solution to the 0-1 integer program in lines (35.12)–(35.14) is also
a feasible solution to its linear -programming relaxation in lines (35.15)–
(35.18). Therefore, the value of an optimal solution to the linear -
programming relaxation provides a lower bound on the value of an optimal
solution to the 0-1 integer program, and hence a lower bound on the optimal
weight in the minimum-weight vertex-cover problem.
The procedure A PPROX -M IN -W EIGHT -VC on the facing page starts with a
solution to the linear -programming relaxation and uses it to construct an
approximate solution to the minimum-weight vertex-cover problem. The
procedure works as follows. Line 1 initializes the vertex cover to be empty .
Line 2 formulates the linear -programming relaxation in lines (35.15)–
(35.18) and then solves this linear program. An optimal solution gives each
vertex v  an associated value x ( v ), where 0 ≤ x ( v ) ≤ 1. The procedure uses
this value to guide the choice of which vertices to add to the vertex cover C
in lines 3–5: the vertex cover C  includes vertex v  if and only if x ( v ) ≥ 1/2. In
ef fect, the procedure “rounds” each fractional variable in the solution to the
linear -programming relaxation to either 0 or 1 in order to obtain a solution
to the 0-1 integer program in lines (35.12)–(35.14). Finally , line 6 returns
the vertex cover C .
Theorem 35.6
Page number: 1313
Algorithm A PPROX -M IN -W EIGHT -VC is a polynomial-time2-approximation
algorithm for the minimum-weight vertex-cover problem.
A PPROX -M IN -W EIGHT -VC ( G , w )
1 C  = Ø
2 compute x , an optimal solution to the linear -programming relaxation in lines (35.15)–(35.18)
3 for  each vertex v  ∈  V
4 if  x ( v ) ≥ 1/2
5 C  = C  ∪  { v }
6 r eturn  C
Proof    Because there is a polynomial-time algorithm to solve the linear
program in line 2, and because the for  loop of lines 3–5 runs in polynomial
time, A PPROX -M IN -W EIGHT -VC is a polynomial-time algorithm.
It remains to show that A PPROX -M IN -W EIGHT -VC is a 2-approximation
algorithm. Let C * be an optimal solution to the minimum-weight vertex-
cover problem, and let z * be the value of an optimal solution to the linear -
programming relaxation in lines (35.15)–(35.18). Since an optimal vertex
cover is a feasible solution to the linear -programming relaxation, z * must be
a lower bound on w ( C *), that is,
Next, we claim that rounding the fractional values of the variables x ( v ) in
lines 3–5 produces a set C  that is a vertex cover and satisfies w ( C ) ≤ 2 z *. T o
see that C  is a vertex cover , consider any edge ( u , v ) ∈  E . By constraint
(35.16), we know that x ( u ) + x ( v ) ≥ 1, which implies that at least one of x ( u )
and x ( v ) is at least 1/2. Therefore, at least one of u  and v  is included in the
vertex cover , and so every edge is covered.
Now we consider the weight of the cover . W e have
Page number: 1314
Combining inequalities (35.19) and (35.20) gives
w ( C ) ≤ 2 z * ≤ 2 w ( C *),
and hence A PPROX -M IN -W EIGHT -VC is a 2-approximation algorithm.
▪
Exer cises
35.4-1
Show that even if a clause is allowed to contain both a variable and its
negation, randomly setting each variable to 1 with probability 1/2 and to 0
with probability 1/2 still yields a randomized 8/7-approximation algorithm.
35.4-2
The MAX-CNF satisfiability problem  is like the MAX-3-CNF satisfiability
problem, except that it does not restrict each clause to have exactly three
literals. Give a randomized 2-approximation algorithm for the MAX-CNF
satisfiability problem.
35.4-3
In the MAX-CUT problem, the input is an unweighted undirected graph G
= ( V , E ). W e define a cut ( S , V  − S ) as in Chapter 21  and the weight  of a cut
as the number of edges crossing the cut. The goal is to find a cut of
maximum weight. Suppose that each vertex v  is randomly and
Page number: 1315
independently placed into S  with probability 1/2 and into V  − S  with
probability 1/2. Show that this algorithm is a randomized 2-approximation
algorithm.
35.4-4
Show that the constraints in line (35.17) are redundant in the sense that
removing them from the linear -programming relaxation in lines (35.15)–
(35.18) yields a linear program for which any optimal solution x  must
satisfy x ( v ) ≤ 1 for each v  ∈  V .
35.5    The subset-sum pr oblem
Recall from Section 34.5.5  that an instance of the subset-sum problem is
given by a pair ( S , t ), where S  is a set { x1 , x2 , … , xn } of positive integers
and t  is a positive integer . This decision problem asks whether there exists a
subset of S  that adds up exactly to the tar get value t . As we saw in Section
34.5.5 , this problem is NP-complete.
The optimization problem associated with this decision problem arises
in practical applications. The optimization problem seeks a subset of { x1 ,
x2 , … , xn } whose sum is as lar ge as possible but not lar ger than t . For
example, consider a truck that can carry no more than t  pounds, which is to
be loaded with up to n  dif ferent boxes, the i th of which weighs xi  pounds.
How heavy a load can the truck take without exceeding the t -pound weight
limit?
W e start this section with an exponential-time algorithm to compute the
optimal value for this optimization problem. Then we show how to modify
the algorithm so that it becomes a fully polynomial-time approximation
scheme. (Recall that a fully polynomial-time approximation scheme has a
running time that is polynomial in 1/ ϵ  as well as in the size of the input.)
An exponential-time exact algorithm
Suppose that you compute, for each subset S ′ of S , the sum of the elements
in S ′, and then you select, among the subsets whose sum does not exceed t ,
the one whose sum is closest to t . This algorithm returns the optimal
solution, but it might take exponential time. T o implement this algorithm,
you can use an iterative procedure that, in iteration i , computes the sums of
Page number: 1316
all subsets of { x1 , x2 , … , xi }, using as a starting point the sums of all
subsets of { x1 , x2 , … , xi −1 }. In doing so, you would realize that once a
particular subset S ′ has a sum exceeding t , there is no reason to maintain it,
since no superset of S ′ can be an optimal solution. Let’ s see how to
implement this strategy .
The procedure E XACT -S UBSET -S UM  takes an input set S  = { x1 , x2 , … ,
xn }, the size n  = | S |, and a tar get value t . This procedure iteratively
computes Li , the list of sums of all subsets of { x1 , … , xi } that do not exceed
t , and then it returns the maximum value in Ln .
If L  is a list of positive integers and x  is another positive integer , then let
L  + x  denote the list of integers derived from L  by increasing each element
of L  by x . For example, if L  = 〈 1, 2, 3, 5, 9 〉 , then L  + 2 = 〈 3, 4, 5, 7, 1 1〉 .
This notation extends to sets, so that
S  + x  = { s  + x  : s  ∈  S }.
E XACT -S UBSET -S UM  ( S , n, t )
1 L 0  = 〈 0〉
2 for  i  = 1 to  n
3 L i  = M ERGE -L ISTS  ( L i −1 , L i −1  + x i )
4 remove from L i  every element that is greater than t
5 r eturn  the lar gest element in L n
E XACT -S UBSET -S UM  invokes an auxiliary procedure M ERGE -L ISTS  ( L ,
L ′), which returns the sorted list that is the mer ge of its two sorted input lists
L  and L ′, with duplicate values removed. Like the M ERGE  procedure we
used in mer ge sort on page 36, M ERGE -L ISTS  runs in O (| L | + | L ′|) time. W e
omit the pseudocode for M ERGE -L ISTS .
T o see how E XACT -S UBSET -S UM  works, let Pi  denote the set of values
obtained by selecting each (possibly empty) subset of { x1 , x2 , … , xi } and
summing its members. For example, if S  = {1, 4, 5}, then
P 1 = {0, 1},
P 2 = {0, 1, 4, 5},
P 3 = {0, 1, 4, 5, 6, 9, 10}.
Page number: 1317
Given the identity
you can prove by induction on i  (see Exercise 35.5-1) that the list Li  is a
sorted list containing every element of Pi  whose value is not more than t .
Since the length of Li  can be as much as 2i, E XACT -S UBSET -S UM  is an
exponential-time algorithm in general, although it is a polynomial-time
algorithm in the special cases in which t  is polynomial in | S | or all the
numbers in S  are bounded by a polynomial in | S |.
A fully polynomial-time appr oximation scheme
The key to devising a fully polynomial-time approximation scheme for the
subset-sum problem is to “trim” each list Li  after it is created. Here’ s the
idea behind trimming: if two values in L  are close to each other , then since
the goal is just an approximate solution, there is no need to maintain both of
them explicitly . More precisely , use a trimming parameter δ  such that 0 < δ
< 1. When trimming  a list L  by δ , remove as many elements from L  as
possible, in such a way that if L ′ is the result of trimming L , then for every
element y  that was removed from L , some element z  still in L ′ approximates
y . For z  to approximate y , it must be no greater than y  and also within a
factor of 1 + δ  of y , so that
Y ou can think of such a z  as “representing” y  in the new list L ′. Each
removed element y  is represented by a remaining element z  satisfying
inequality (35.22). For example, suppose that δ  = 0.1 and
L  = 〈 10, 1 1, 12, 15, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 29 〉 .
Then trimming L  results in
L ′ = 〈 10, 12, 15, 20, 23, 29 〉 ,
where the deleted value 1 1 is represented by 10, the deleted values 21 and
22 are represented by 20, and the deleted value 24 is represented by 23.
Because every element of the trimmed version of the list is also an element
of the original version of the list, trimming can dramatically decrease the
Page number: 1318
number of elements kept while keeping a close (and slightly smaller)
representative value in the list for each deleted element.
The procedure T RIM  trims list L  = 〈 y1 , y2 , … , ym〉  in Θ( m ) time, given L
and the trimming parameter δ . It assumes that L  is sorted into
monotonically increasing order . The output of the procedure is a trimmed,
sorted list. The procedure scans the elements of L  in monotonically
increasing order . A number is appended onto the returned list L ′ only if it is
the first element of L  or if it cannot be represented by the most recent
number placed into L ′.
T RIM  ( L , δ )
1 let m  be the length of L
2 L ′ = 〈 y 1〉
3 last  = y 1
4 for  i  = 2 to  m
5 if  y i  > last  · (1 + δ ) //  y i  ≥ last  because L  is sorted
6 append y i  onto the end of L ′
7 last  = y i
8 r eturn  L ′
Given the procedure T RIM , the procedure A PPROX -S UBSET -S UM  on the
following page implements the approximation scheme. This procedure
takes as input a set S  = { x1 , x2 , … , xn } of n  integers (in arbitrary order), the
size n  = | S |, the tar get integer t , and an approximation parameter ϵ , where
It returns a value z * whose value is within a factor of 1 + ϵ  of the optimal
solution.
The A PPROX -S UBSET -S UM  procedure works as follows. Line 1 initializes
the list L0  to be the list containing just the element 0. The for  loop in lines
2–5 computes Li  as a sorted list containing a suitably trimmed version of the
set Pi , with all elements lar ger than t  removed. Since the procedure creates
Li  from Li −1 , it must ensure that the repeated trimming doesn’ t introduce too
much compounded inaccuracy . That’ s why instead of the trimming
parameter being ϵ  in the call to T RIM , it has the smaller value ϵ /2 n . W e’ll
soon see that A PPROX -S UBSET -S UM  returns a correct approximation if one
exists.
Page number: 1319
A PPROX -S UBSET -S UM  ( S , n, t, ϵ )
1 L 0  = 〈 0〉
2 for  i  = 1 to  n
3 L i  = M ERGE -L ISTS  ( L i −1 , L i −1  + x i )
4 L i  = T RIM  ( L i , ϵ /2 n )
5 remove from L i  every element that is greater than t
6 let z * be the lar gest value in L n
7 r eturn  z *
As an example, suppose that A PPROX -S UBSET -S UM  is given
S  = 〈 104, 102, 201, 101 〉
with t  = 308 and ϵ  = 0.40. The trimming parameter δ  is ϵ /2 n  = 0.40/80 =
0.05. The procedure computes the following values on the indicated lines:
line 1: L 0  = 〈 0〉 ,
line 3: L 1  = 〈 0, 104 〉 ,
line 4: L 1  = 〈 0, 104 〉 ,
line 5: L 1  = 〈 0, 104 〉 ,
line 3: L 2  = 〈 0, 102, 104, 206 〉 ,
line 4: L 2  = 〈 0, 102, 206 〉 ,
line 5: L 2  = 〈 0, 102, 206 〉 ,
line 3: L 3  = 〈 0, 102, 201, 206, 303, 407 〉 ,
line 4: L 3  = 〈 0, 102, 201, 303, 407 〉 ,
line 5: L 3  = 〈 0, 102, 201, 303 〉 ,
line 3: L 4  = 〈 0, 101, 102, 201, 203, 302, 303, 404 〉 ,
line 4: L 4  = 〈 0, 101, 201, 302, 404 〉 ,
line 5: L 4  = 〈 0, 101, 201, 302 〉 .
The procedure returns z * = 302 as its answer , which is well within ϵ  = 40%
of the optimal answer 307 = 104 + 102 + 101. In fact, it is within 2%.
Theorem 35.7
A PPROX -S UBSET -S UM  is a fully polynomial-time approximation scheme for
the subset-sum problem.
Page number: 1320
Proof    The operations of trimming Li  in line 4 and removing from Li  every
element that is greater than t  maintain the property that every element of Li
is also a member of Pi . Therefore, the value z * returned in line 7 is indeed
the sum of some subset of S , that is, z * ∈  Pn . Let y * ∈  Pn  denote an
optimal solution to the subset-sum problem, so that it is the greatest value in
Pn  that is less than or equal to t . Because line 5 ensures that z * ≤ t , we know
that z * ≤ y *. By inequality (35.1), we need to show that y */ z * ≤ 1 + ϵ . W e
must also show that the running time of this algorithm is polynomial in both
1/ ϵ  and the size of the input.
As Exercise 35.5-2 asks you to show , for every element y  in Pi  that is at
most t , there exists an element z  ∈  Li  such that
Inequality (35.24) must hold for y * ∈  Pn , and therefore there exists an
element z  ∈  Ln  such that
and thus
Since there exists an element z  ∈  Ln  fulfilling inequality (35.25), the
inequality must hold for z *, which is the lar gest value in Ln , which is to say
Now we show that y */ z * ≤ 1 + ϵ . W e do so by showing that (1 + ϵ /2 n )n ≤
1 + ϵ . First, inequality (35.23), 0 < ϵ  < 1, implies that
Next, from equation (3.16) on page 66, we have limn →∞ (1 + ϵ /2 n )n = eϵ /2.
Exercise 35.5-3 asks you to show that
Page number: 1321
Therefore, the function (1 + ϵ /2 n )n increases with n  as it approaches its
limit of eϵ /2, and we have
Combining inequalities (35.26) and (35.29) completes the analysis of the
approximation ratio.
T o show that A PPROX -S UBSET -S UM  is a fully polynomial-time
approximation scheme, we derive a bound on the length of Li . After
trimming, successive elements z  and z ′ of Li  must have the relationship z ′/ z
> 1 + ϵ /2 n . That is, they must dif fer by a factor of at least 1 + ϵ /2 n . Each
list, therefore, contains the value 0, possibly the value 1, and up to ⌊ log1 +
ϵ /2 n  t ⌋  additional values. The number of elements in each list Li  is at most
This bound is polynomial in the size of the input—which is the number of
bits lg t  needed to represent t  plus the number of bits needed to represent the
set S , which in turn is polynomial in n —and in 1/ ϵ . Since the running time
of A PPROX -S UBSET -S UM  is polynomial in the lengths of the lists Li , we
conclude that A PPROX -S UBSET -S UM  is a fully polynomial-time
approximation scheme.
▪
Exer cises
35.5-1
Page number: 1322
Prove equation (35.21). Then show that after executing line 4 of E XACT -
S UBSET -S UM , Li  is a sorted list containing every element of Pi  whose value
is not more than t .
35.5-2
Using induction on i , prove inequality (35.24).
35.5-3
Prove inequality (35.28).
35.5-4
How can you modify the approximation scheme presented in this section to
find a good approximation to the smallest value not less than t  that is a sum
of some subset of the given input list?
35.5-5
Modify the A PPROX -S UBSET -S UM  procedure to also return the subset of S
that sums to the value z *.
Pr oblems
35-1     Bin packing
Y ou are given a set of n  objects, where the size si  of the i th object satisfies 0
< si  < 1. Y our goal is to pack all the objects into the minimum number of
unit-size bins. Each bin can hold any subset of the objects whose total size
does not exceed 1.
a.  Prove that the problem of determining the minimum number of bins
required is NP-hard. ( Hint:  Reduce from the subset-sum problem.)
The first-fit  heuristic takes each object in turn and places it into the first bin
that can accommodate it, as follows. It maintains an ordered list of bins. Let
b  denote the number of bins in the list, where b  increases over the course of
the algorithm, and let 〈 B1 , … , Bb〉  be the list of bins. Initially b  = 0 and the
list is empty . The algorithm takes each object i  in turn and places it in the
lowest-numbered bin that can still accommodate it. If no bin can
accommodate object i , then b  is incremented and a new bin Bb  is opened,
containing object i . Let 
 .
Page number: 1323
b.  Ar gue that the optimal number of bins required is at least ⌈ S ⌉ .
c.  Ar gue that the first-fit heuristic leaves at most one bin at most half full.
d.  Prove that the number of bins used by the first-fit heuristic never exceeds
⌈ 2 S ⌉ .
e.  Prove an approximation ratio of 2 for the first-fit heuristic.
f.  Give an ef ficient implementation of the first-fit heuristic, and analyze its
running time.
35-2     Approximating the size of a maximum clique
Let G  = ( V , E ) be an undirected graph. For any k  ≥ 1, define G( k ) to be the
undirected graph ( V  ( k ), E( k )), where V  ( k ) is the set of all ordered k -tuples of
vertices from V  and E( k ) is defined so that ( v1 , v2 , … , vk ) is adjacent to ( w1 ,
w2 , … , wk ) if and only if for i  = 1, 2, … , k , either vertex vi  is adjacent to wi
in G , or else vi  = wi .
a.  Prove that the size of the maximum clique in G( k ) is equal to the k th
power of the size of the maximum clique in G .
b.  Ar gue that if there is an approximation algorithm that has a constant
approximation ratio for finding a maximum-size clique, then there is a
polynomial-time approximation scheme for the problem.
35-3     W eighted set-covering problem
Suppose that sets have weights in the set-covering problem, so that each set
Si  in the family ℱ  has an associated weight wi . The weight of a cover C  is 
. The goal is wish to determine a minimum-weight cover . ( Section
35.3  handles the case in which wi  = 1 for all i .)
Show how to generalize the greedy set-covering heuristic in a natural
manner to provide an approximate solution for any instance of the weighted
set-covering problem. Letting d  be the maximum size of any set Si , show
that your heuristic has an approximation ratio of 
 .
35-4     Maximum matching
Page number: 1324
Recall that for an undirected graph G , a matching is a set of edges such that
no two edges in the set are incident on the same vertex. Section 25.1
showed how to find a maximum matching in a bipartite graph, that is, a
matching such that no other matching in G  contains more edges. This
problem examines matchings in undirected graphs that are not required to
be bipartite.
a.  Show that a maximal matching need not be a maximum matching by
exhibiting an undirected graph G  and a maximal matching M  in G  that is
not a maximum matching. ( Hint:  Y ou can find such a graph with only
four vertices.)
b.  Consider a connected, undirected graph G  = ( V , E ). Give an O ( E )-time
greedy algorithm to find a maximal matching in G .
This problem concentrates on a polynomial-time approximation algorithm
for maximum matching. Whereas the fastest known algorithm for
maximum matching takes superlinear (but polynomial) time, the
approximation algorithm here will run in linear time. Y ou will show that the
linear -time greedy algorithm for maximal matching in part (b) is a 2-
approximation algorithm for maximum matching.
c.  Show that the size of a maximum matching in G  is a lower bound on the
size of any vertex cover for G .
d.  Consider a maximal matching M  in G  = ( V , E ). Let T  = { v  ∈  V  : some
edge in M  is incident on v }. What can you say about the subgraph of G
induced by the vertices of G  that are not in T  ?
e.  Conclude from part (d) that 2 | M | is the size of a vertex cover for G .
f.  Using parts (c) and (e), prove that the greedy algorithm in part (b) is a 2-
approximation algorithm for maximum matching.
35-5     Parallel machine scheduling
In the parallel-machine-scheduling problem , the input has two parts: n
jobs, J1 , J2 , … , Jn , where each job Jk  has an associated nonnegative
processing time of pk , and m  identical machines, M1 , M2 , … , Mm . Any job
can run on any machine. A schedule  specifies, for each job Jk , the machine
on which it runs and the time period during which it runs. Each job Jk  must
Page number: 1325
run on some machine Mi  for pk  consecutive time units, and during that time
period no other job may run on Mi . Let Ck  denote the completion time  of
job Jk , that is, the time at which job Jk  completes processing. Given a
schedule, define Cmax  = max { Cj  : 1 ≤ j  ≤ n } to be the makespan  of the
schedule. The goal is to find a schedule whose makespan is minimum.
For example, consider an input with two machines M1  and M2 , and four
jobs J1 , J2 , J3 , and J4  with p1  = 2, p2  = 12, p3  = 4, and p4  = 5. Then one
possible schedule runs, on machine M1 , job J1  followed by job J2 , and on
machine M2 , job J4  followed by job J3 . For this schedule, C1  = 2, C2  = 14,
C3  = 9, C4  = 5, and Cmax  = 14. An optimal schedule runs job J2  on machine
M1  and jobs J1 , J3 , and J4  on machine M2 . For this schedule, we have C1  =
2, C2  = 12, C3  = 6, and C4  = 1 1, and so Cmax  = 12.
Given the input to a parallel-machine-scheduling problem, let 
denote the makespan of an optimal schedule.
a.  Show that the optimal makespan is at least as lar ge as the greatest
processing time, that is,
b.  Show that the optimal makespan is at least as lar ge as the average
machine load, that is,
Consider the following greedy algorithm for parallel machine scheduling:
whenever a machine is idle, schedule any job that has not yet been
scheduled.
c.  W rite pseudocode to implement this greedy algorithm. What is the
running time of your algorithm?
d.  For the schedule returned by the greedy algorithm, show that

Page number: 1326
Conclude that this algorithm is a polynomial-time 2-approximation
algorithm.
35-6     Approximating a maximum spanning tree
Let G  = ( V , E ) be an undirected graph with distinct edge weights w ( u, v ) on
each edge ( u , v ) ∈  E . For each vertex v  ∈  V , denote by max( v ) the
maximum-weight edge incident on that vertex. Let SG = {max( v ) : v  ∈  V  }
be the set of maximum-weight edges incident on each vertex, and let TG  be
the maximum-weight spanning tree of G , that is, the spanning tree of
maximum total weight. For any subset of edges E ′ ⊆  E , define w ( E ′) =
Σ( u , v ) ∈ E′  w ( u, v ).
a.  Give an example of a graph with at least 4 vertices for which SG  = TG .
b.  Give an example of a graph with at least 4 vertices for which SG  ≠ TG .
c.  Prove that SG  ⊆  TG  for any graph G .
d.  Prove that w ( SG ) ≥ w ( TG )/2 for any graph G .
e.  Give an O ( V  + E )-time algorithm to compute a 2-approximation to the
maximum spanning tree.
35-7     An approximation algorithm for the 0-1 knapsack problem
Recall the knapsack problem from Section 15.2 . The input includes n  items,
where the i th item is worth vi  dollars and weighs wi  pounds. The input also
includes the capacity of a knapsack, which is W  pounds. Here, we add the
further assumptions that each weight wi  is at most W  and that the items are
indexed in monotonically decreasing order of their values: v1  ≥ v2  ≥ ⋯  ≥ vn .
In the 0-1 knapsack problem, the goal is to find a subset of the items
whose total weight is at most W  and whose total value is maximum. The
fractional knapsack problem is like the 0-1 knapsack problem, except that a
fraction of each item may be put into the knapsack, rather than either all or
none of each item. If a fraction xi  of item i  goes into the knapsack, where 0
≤ xi  ≤ 1, it contributes xi wi  to the weight of the knapsack and adds value xi vi .
The goal of this problem is to develop a polynomial-time 2-approximation
algorithm for the 0-1 knapsack problem.
Page number: 1327
In order to design a polynomial-time algorithm, let’ s consider restricted
instances of the 0-1 knapsack problem. Given an instance I  of the knapsack
problem, form restricted instances Ij , for j  = 1, 2, … , n , by removing items
1, 2, … , j  − 1 and requiring the solution to include item j  (all of item j  in
both the fractional and 0-1 knapsack problems). No items are removed in
instance I1 . For instance Ij , let Pj  denote an optimal solution to the 0-1
problem and Qj  denote an optimal solution to the fractional problem.
a.  Ar gue that an optimal solution to instance I  of the 0-1 knapsack problem
is one of { P1 , P2 , … , Pn }.
b.  Prove that to find an optimal solution Qj  to the fractional problem for
instance Ij , you can include item j  and then use the greedy algorithm in
which each step takes as much as possible of the unchosen item with the
maximum value per pound vi / wi  in the set { j  + 1, j  + 2, … , n }.
c.  Prove that there is always an optimal solution Qj  to the fractional problem
for instance Ij  that includes at most one item fractionally . That is, for all
items except possibly one, either all of the item or none of the item goes
into the knapsack.
d.  Given an optimal solution Qj  to the fractional problem for instance Ij ,
form solution Rj  from Qj  by deleting any fractional items from Qj . Let
v ( S ) denote the total value of items taken in a solution S . Prove that v ( Rj )
≥ v ( Qj )/2 ≥ v ( Pj )/2.
e.  Give a polynomial-time algorithm that returns a maximum-value solution
from the set { R1 , R2 , … , Rn }, and prove that your algorithm is a
polynomial-time 2-approximation algorithm for the 0-1 knapsack
problem.
Chapter notes
Although methods that do not necessarily compute exact solutions have
been known for thousands of years (for example, methods to approximate
the value of π ), the notion of an approximation algorithm is much more
recent. Hochbaum [ 221 ] credits Garey , Graham, and Ullman [ 175 ] and
Page number: 1328
Johnson [ 236 ] with formalizing the concept of a polynomial-time
approximation algorithm. The first such algorithm is often credited to
Graham [ 197 ].
Since this early work, thousands of approximation algorithms have been
designed for a wide range of problems, and there is a wealth of literature on
this field. T exts by Ausiello et al. [ 29 ], Hochbaum [ 221 ], V azirani [ 446 ],
and W illiamson and Shmoys [ 459 ] deal exclusively with approximation
algorithms, as do surveys by Shmoys [ 409 ] and Klein and Y oung [ 256 ].
Several other texts, such as Garey and Johnson [ 176 ] and Papadimitriou and
Steiglitz [ 353 ], have significant coverage of approximation algorithms as
well. Books edited by Lawler , Lenstra, Rinnooy Kan, and Shmoys [ 277 ]
and by Gutin and Punnen [ 204 ] provide extensive treatments of
approximation algorithms and heuristics for the traveling-salesperson
problem.
Papadimitriou and Steiglitz attribute the algorithm A PPROX -V ER TEX -
C OVER  to F . Gavril and M. Y annakakis. The vertex-cover problem has been
studied extensively (Hochbaum [ 221 ] lists 16 dif ferent approximation
algorithms for this problem), but all the approximation ratios are at least 2 −
o (1).
The algorithm A PPROX -TSP-T OUR  appears in a paper by Rosenkrantz,
Stearns, and Lewis [ 384 ]. Christofides improved on this algorithm and gave
a 3/2-approximation algorithm for the traveling-salesperson problem with
the triangle inequality . Arora [ 23 ] and Mitchell [ 330 ] have shown that if the
points lie in the euclidean plane, there is a polynomial-time approximation
scheme. Theorem 35.3 is due to Sahni and Gonzalez [ 392 ].
The algorithm A PPROX -S UBSET -S UM  and its analysis are loosely modeled
after related approximation algorithms for the knapsack and subset-sum
problems by Ibarra and Kim [ 234 ].
Problem 35-7 is a combinatorial version of a more general result on
approximating knapsack-type integer programs by Bienstock and McClosky
[ 55 ].
The randomized algorithm for MAX-3-CNF satisfiability is implicit in
the work of Johnson [ 236 ]. The weighted vertex-cover algorithm is by
Hochbaum [ 220 ]. Section 35.4  only touches on the power of randomization
and linear programming in the design of approximation algorithms. A
combination of these two ideas yields a technique called “randomized
rounding,” which formulates a problem as an integer linear program, solves
Page number: 1329
the linear -programming relaxation, and interprets the variables in the
solution as probabilities. These probabilities then help guide the solution of
the original problem. This technique was first used by Raghavan and
Thompson [ 374 ], and it has had many subsequent uses. (See Motwani,
Naor , and Raghavan [ 335 ] for a survey .) Several other notable ideas in the
field of approximation algorithms include the primal-dual method (see
Goemans and W illiamson [ 184 ] for a survey), finding sparse cuts for use in
divide-and-conquer algorithms [ 288 ], and the use of semidefinite
programming [ 183 ].
As mentioned in the chapter notes for Chapter 34 , results in
probabilistically checkable proofs have led to lower bounds on the
approximability of many problems, including several in this chapter . In
addition to the references there, the chapter by Arora and Lund [ 26 ]
contains a good description of the relationship between probabilistically
checkable proofs and the hardness of approximating various problems.
1 When the approximation ratio is independent of n , we use the terms “approximation ratio of ρ ” and
“ ρ -approximation algorithm,” indicating no dependence on n .
Page number: 1330
Part VIII    Appendix: Mathematical Background
Page number: 1331
 
 
Intr oduction
When you analyze algorithms, you often need to draw upon a body of
mathematical tools. Some of these tools are as simple as high-school
algebra, but others may be new to you. In Part I , we saw how to manipulate
asymptotic notations and solve recurrences. This appendix comprises a
compendium of several other concepts and methods used in analyzing
algorithms. As noted in the introduction to Part I , you may have seen much
of the material in this appendix before having read this book, although some
of the specific notational conventions appearing here might dif fer from
those you have seen elsewhere. Hence, you should treat this appendix as
reference material. As in the rest of this book, however , we have included
exercises and problems, in order for you to improve your skills in these
areas.
Appendix A  of fers methods for evaluating and bounding summations,
which occur frequently in the analysis of algorithms. Many of the formulas
here appear in any calculus text, but you will find it convenient to have
these methods compiled in one place.
Appendix B  contains basic definitions and notations for sets, relations,
functions, graphs, and trees. It also gives some basic properties of these
mathematical objects.
Appendix C  begins with elementary principles of counting:
permutations, combinations, and the like. The remainder contains
definitions and properties of basic probability . Most of the algorithms in
this book require no probability for their analysis, and thus you can easily
omit the latter sections of the chapter on a first reading, even without
skimming them. Later , when you encounter a probabilistic analysis that you
Page number: 1332
want to understand better , you will find Appendix C  well or ganized for
reference purposes.
Appendix D  defines matrices, their operations, and some of their basic
properties. Y ou have probably seen most of this material already if you have
taken a course in linear algebra. But you might find it helpful to have one
place to look for notations and definitions.
Page number: 1333
A Summations
When an algorithm contains an iterative control construct such as a while  or
for  loop, you can express its running time as the sum of the times spent on
each execution of the body of the loop. For example, Section 2.2  ar gued
that the i  th iteration of insertion sort took time proportional to i  in the worst
case. Adding up the time spent on each iteration produced the summation
(or series) 
 . Evaluating this summation resulted in a bound of Θ( n2) on
the worst-case running time of the algorithm. This example illustrates why
you should know how to manipulate and bound summations.
Section A.1  lists several basic formulas involving summations. Section
A.2  of fers useful techniques for bounding summations. The formulas in
Section A.1  appear without proof, though proofs for some of them appear in
Section A.2  to illustrate the methods of that section. Y ou can find most of
the other proofs in any calculus text.
A.1 Summation formulas and pr operties
Given a sequence a1 , a2 , … , an  of numbers, where n  is a nonnegative
integer , the finite sum a1  + a2  + … + an  can be expressed as 
 . If n  = 0,
the value of the summation is defined to be 0. The value of a finite series is
always well defined, and the order in which its terms are added does not
matter .
Given an infinite sequence a1 , a2 , … of numbers, we can write their
infinite sum a1  + a2  + … as 
 , which means 
 . If the limit
does not exist, the series diverges , and otherwise, it converges . The terms of
a conver gent series cannot always be added in any order . Y ou can, however ,
Page number: 1334
rearrange the terms of an absolutely convergent series , that is, a series 
 for which the series 
  also conver ges.
Linearity
For any real number c  and any finite sequences a1 , a2 , … , an  and b1 , b2 , …
, bn ,
The linearity property also applies to infinite conver gent series.
The linearity property applies to summations incorporating asymptotic
notation. For example,
In this equation, the Θ-notation on the left-hand side applies to the variable
k , but on the right-hand side, it applies to n . Such manipulations also apply
to infinite conver gent series.
Arithmetic series
The summation
is an arithmetic series  and has the value
A general arithmetic series  includes an additive constant a  ≥ 0 and a
constant coef ficient b  > 0 in each term, but has the same total
asymptotically:
Sums of squar es and cubes
Page number: 1335
The following formulas apply to summations of squares and cubes:
Geometric series
For real x  ≠ 1, the summation
is a geometric series  and has the value
The infinite decreasing geometric series occurs when the summation is
infinite and | x | < 1:
If we assume that 00 = 1, these formulas apply even when x  = 0.
Harmonic series
For positive integers n , the n th harmonic number  is
Inequalities (A.20) and (A.21) on page 1 150 provide the stronger bounds
Integrating and differ entiating series
Integrating or dif ferentiating the formulas above yields additional formulas.
For example, dif ferentiating both sides of the infinite geometric series (A.7)
Page number: 1336
and multiplying by x  gives
T elescoping series
For any sequence a0 , a1 , … , an ,
since each of the terms a1 , a2 , … , an −1  is added in exactly once and
subtracted out exactly once. W e say that the sum telescopes . Similarly ,
As an example of a telescoping sum, consider the series
Rewriting each term as
gives
Reindexing summations
A series can sometimes be simplified by changing its index, often reversing
the order of summation. Consider the series 
 . Because the terms in
this summation are an , an −1 , … , a0 , we can reverse the order of indices by
letting j  = n  − k  and rewrite this summation as
Page number: 1337
Generally , if the summation index appears in the body of the sum with a
minus sign, it’ s worth thinking about reindexing.
As an example, consider the summation
The index k  appears with a negative sign in 1/( n  − k  + 1). And indeed, we
can simplify this summation, this time setting j  = n  − k  + 1, yielding
which is just the harmonic series (A.8).
Pr oducts
The finite product a1 a2  … an  can be expressed as
If n  = 0, the value of the product is defined to be 1. Y ou can convert a
formula with a product to a formula with a summation by using the identity
Exer cises
A.1-1
Prove that 
  by using the linearity property of
summations.
A.1-2
Find a simple formula for 
 .
A.1-3
Interpret the decimal number 1 1 1,1 1 1,1 1 1 in light of equation (A.6).
Page number: 1338
A.1-4
Evaluate the infinite series 
 .
A.1-5
Let c  ≥ 0 be a constant. Show that 
 .
A.1-6
Show that 
  for | x | < 1.
A.1-7
Prove that 
 . ( Hint:  Show the asymptotic upper and
lower bounds separately .)
★  A.1-8
Show that 
  by manipulating the harmonic series.
★  A.1-9
Show that 
 .
★  A.1-10
Evaluate the sum 
 .
★  A.1-1 1
Evaluate the product 
 .
A.2 Bounding summations
Y ou can choose from several techniques to bound the summations that
describe the running times of algorithms. Here are some of the most
frequently used methods.
Mathematical induction
The most basic way to evaluate a series is to use mathematical induction.
As an example, let’ s prove that the arithmetic series 
  evaluates to n ( n
+ 1)/2. For n  = 1, we have that n ( n  + 1)/2 = 1 · 2/2 = 1, which equals 
 .
W ith the inductive assumption that it holds for n , we prove that it holds for
n  + 1. W e have
Page number: 1339
Y ou don’ t always need to guess the exact value of a summation in order
to use mathematical induction. Instead, you can use induction to prove an
upper or lower bound on a summation. As an example, let’ s prove the
asymptotic upper bound 
 . More specifically , we’ll prove that 
 for some constant c . For the initial condition n  = 0, we have 
 as long as c  ≥ 1. Assuming that the bound holds for n , we
prove that it holds for n  + 1. W e have
as long as (1/3 + 1/ c ) ≤ 1 or , equivalently , c  ≥ 3/2. Thus, 
 , as
we wished to show .
Y ou need to take care when using asymptotic notation to prove bounds
by induction. Consider the following fallacious proof that 
 .
Certainly , 
 . Assuming that the bound holds for n , we now prove
it for n  + 1:
The bug in the ar gument is that the “constant” hidden by the “big-oh”
grows with n  and thus is not constant. W e have not shown that the same
constant works for all n .
Bounding the terms
Page number: 1340
Y ou can sometimes obtain a good upper bound on a series by bounding
each term of the series, and it often suf fices to use the lar gest term to bound
the others. For example, a quick upper bound on the arithmetic series (A.1)
is
In general, for a series 
 , if we let amax  = max { ak  : 1 ≤ k  ≤ n }, then
The technique of bounding each term in a series by the lar gest term is a
weak method when the series can in fact be bounded by a geometric series.
Given the series 
 , suppose that ak +1 / ak  ≤ r  for all k  ≥ 0, where 0 < r  <
1 is a constant. Y ou can bound the sum by an infinite decreasing geometric
series, since ak  ≤ a0 rk, and thus
Y ou can apply this method to bound the summation 
 . In order
to start the summation at k  = 0, rewrite it as 
 . The first term
( a0 ) is 1/3, and the ratio ( r ) of consecutive terms is
for all k  ≥ 0. Thus, we have

Page number: 1341
A common bug in applying this method is to show that the ratio of
consecutive terms is less than 1 and then to assume that the summation is
bounded by a geometric series. An example is the infinite harmonic series,
which diver ges since
The ratio of the ( k +1)st and k th terms in this series is k /( k +1) < 1, but the
series is not bounded by a decreasing geometric series. T o bound a series by
a geometric series, you need to show that there is an r  < 1, which is a
constant , such that the ratio of all pairs of consecutive terms never exceeds
r . In the harmonic series, no such r  exists because the ratio becomes
arbitrarily close to 1.
Splitting summations
One way to obtain bounds on a dif ficult summation is to express the series
as the sum of two or more series by partitioning the range of the index and
then to bound each of the resulting series. For example, let’ s find a lower
bound on the arithmetic series 
 , which we have already seen has an
upper bound of n2. Y ou might attempt to bound each term in the summation
by the smallest term, but since that term is 1, you would get a lower bound
of n  for the summation—far of f from the upper bound of n2.
Y ou can obtain a better lower bound by first splitting the summation.
Assume for convenience that n  is even, so that
which is an asymptotically tight bound, since 
 .
For a summation arising from the analysis of an algorithm, you can
sometimes split the summation and ignore a constant number of the initial
Page number: 1342
terms. Generally , this technique applies when each term ak  in a summation 
 is independent of n . Then for any constant k0  > 0, you can write
since the initial terms of the summation are all constant and there are a
constant number of them. Y ou can then use other methods to bound 
 .
This technique applies to infinite summations as well. For example, let’ s
find an asymptotic upper bound on 
 . The ratio of consecutive terms
is
if k  ≥ 3. Thus, you can split the summation into
The technique of splitting summations can help determine asymptotic
bounds in much more dif ficult situations. For example, here is one way to
obtain a bound of O (lg n ) on the harmonic series (A.9):
The idea is to split the range 1 to n  into ⌊ lg n ⌋  + 1 pieces and upper -bound
the contribution of each piece by 1. For i  = 0, 1, … , ⌊ lg n ⌋ , the i th piece
consists of the terms starting at 1/2i and going up to but not including 1/2i +1.
Page number: 1343
The last piece might contain terms not in the original harmonic series,
giving
Appr oximation by integrals
When a summation has the form 
 , where f  ( k ) is a monotonically
increasing function, you can approximate it by integrals:
Figure A.1  justifies this approximation. The summation is represented as
the area of the rectangles in the figure, and the integral is the blue region
under the curve. When f  ( k ) is a monotonically decreasing function, you can
use a similar method to provide the bounds
The integral approximation (A.19) can be used to prove the tight bounds
in inequality (A.10) for the n th harmonic number . The lower bound is
For the upper bound, the integral approximation gives
Page number: 1344
Exer cises
A.2-1
Show that 
  is bounded above by a constant.
A.2-2
Find an asymptotic upper bound on the summation

Page number: 1345
Figur e A.1  Approximation of 
  by integrals. The area of each rectangle is shown within the
rectangle, and the total rectangle area represents the value of the summation. The integral is
represented by the blue area under the curve. Comparing areas in (a)  gives the lower bound 
. Shifting the rectangles one unit to the right gives the upper bound 
 in (b) .
A.2-3
Show that the n th harmonic number is Ω(lg n ) by splitting the summation.
A.2-4
Approximate 
  with an integral.
A.2-5
Page number: 1346
Why can’ t you use the integral approximation (A.19) directly on 
to obtain an upper bound on the n th harmonic number?
Pr oblems
A-1 Bounding summations
Give asymptotically tight bounds on the following summations. Assume
that r  ≥ 0 and s  ≥ 0 are constants.
a.  
b.  
c.  
Appendix notes
Knuth [ 259 ] provides an excellent reference for the material presented here.
Y ou can find basic properties of series in any good calculus book, such as
Apostol [ 19 ] or Thomas et al. [ 433 ].
Page number: 1347
B Sets, Etc.
Many chapters of this book touch on the elements of discrete mathematics.
This appendix reviews the notations, definitions, and elementary properties
of sets, relations, functions, graphs, and trees. If you are already well versed
in this material, you can probably just skim this chapter .
B.1 Sets
A set  is a collection of distinguishable objects, called its members  or
elements . If an object x  is a member of a set S , we write x  ∈  S  (read “ x  is a
member of S ” or , more briefly , “ x  belongs to S ”). If x  is not a member of S ,
we write x  ∉  S . T o describe a set explicitly , write its members as a list
inside braces. For example, to define a set S  to contain precisely the
numbers 1, 2, and 3, write S  = {1, 2, 3}. Since 2 belongs to the set S , we can
write 2 ∈  S , and since 4 is not a member , we can write 4 ∉  S . A set cannot
contain the same object more than once,1 and its elements are not ordered.
T wo sets A  and B  are equal , written A  = B , if they contain the same
elements. For example, {1, 2, 3, 1} = {1, 2, 3} = {3, 2, 1}.
W e adopt special notations for frequently encountered sets:
Ø denotes the empty set , that is, the set containing no members.
ℤ  denotes the set of integers , that is, the set {… −2, −1, 0, 1, 2,…}.
ℝ  denotes the set of real numbers .
ℕ  denotes the set of natural numbers , that is, the set {0, 1, 2,…}.2
Page number: 1348
If all the elements of a set A  are contained in a set B , that is, if x  ∈  A
implies x  ∈  B , then we write A  ⊆  B  and say that A  is a subset  of B . A set A
is a proper subset  of set B , written A  ⊂  B , if A  ⊆  B  but A  ≠ B . (Some
authors use the symbol “ ⊂ ” to denote the ordinary subset relation, rather
than the proper -subset relation.) Every set is a subset of itself: A  ⊆  A  for
any set A . For two sets A  and B , we have A  = B  if and only if A  ⊆  B  and B
⊆  A . The subset relation is transitive (see page 1 159): for any three sets A ,
B , and C , if A  ⊆  B  and B  ⊆  C , then A  ⊆  C . The proper -subset relation is
transitive as well. The empty set is a subset of all sets: for any set A , we
have Ø ⊆  A .
Sets can be specified in terms of other sets. Given a set A , a set B  ⊆  A
can be defined by stating a property that distinguishes the elements of B .
For example, one way to define the set of even integers is { x  : x  ∈  ℤ  and
x /2 is an integer}. The colon in this notation is read “such that.” (Some
authors use a vertical bar in place of the colon.)
Given two sets A  and B , set operations  define new sets:
The intersection  of sets A  and B  is the set
A  ∩ B  = { x  : x  ∈  A  and x  ∈  B }.
The union  of sets A  and B  is the set
A  ∪  B  = { x  : x  ∈  A  or x  ∈  B }.
The dif ference  between two sets A  and B  is the set
A  − B  = { x  : x  ∈  A  and x  ∉  B }.
Set operations obey the following laws:
Empty set laws:
A  ∩ Ø = Ø,
A  ∪  Ø = A.
Idempotency laws:
A  ∩ A = A ,
A  ∪  A = A.
Page number: 1349
Commutative laws:
A  ∩ B = B  ∩ A ,
A  ∪  B = B  ∪  A .
Figur e B.1  A V enn diagram illustrating the first of DeMor gan’ s laws (B.2). Each of the sets A , B , and
C  is represented as a circle.
Associative laws:
A  ∩ ( B  ∩ C ) = ( A  ∩ B ) ∩ C ,
A  ∪  ( B  ∪  C ) = ( A  ∪  B ) ∪  C.
Distributive laws:
Absorption laws:
A  ∩ ( A  ∪  B ) = A ,
A  ∪  ( A  ∩ B ) = A.
DeMorgan’ s laws:
Figure B.1  illustrates the first of DeMor gan’ s laws, using a V enn diagram :
a graphical picture in which sets are represented as regions of the plane.
Often, all the sets under consideration are subsets of some lar ger set U
called the universe . For example, when considering various sets made up
only of integers, the set ℤ  of integers is an appropriate universe. Given a
universe U , we define the complement  of a set A  as Ā  = U  − A  = { x  : x  ∈  U
and x  ∉  A }. For any set A  ⊆  U , we have the following laws:
Page number: 1350
= A ,
A  ∩ Ā = Ø,
A  ∪  Ā = U .
An equivalent way to express DeMor gan’ s laws (B.2) uses set
complements. For any two sets B, C  ⊆  U , we have
B  ∩ C = B  ∪  C ,
B  ∪  C = B  ∩ C .
T wo sets A  and B  are disjoint  if they have no elements in common, that
is, if A  ∩ B  = Ø. A collection  of sets S1 , S2 , … , either finite or infinite, is a
set of sets, in which each member is a set Si . A collection S  = { Si } of
nonempty sets forms a partition  of a set S  if
the sets are pairwise disjoint , that is, Si , Sj  ∈  S  and i  ≠ j  imply Si  ∩ Sj
= Ø,
their union is S , that is,
In other words, S  forms a partition of S  if each element of S  appears in
exactly one set Si  ∈  S .
The number of elements in a set is the cardinality  (or size ) of the set,
denoted | S |. T wo sets have the same cardinality if their elements can be put
into a one-to-one correspondence. The cardinality of the empty set is |Ø| =
0. If the cardinality of a set is a natural number , the set is finite , and
otherwise, it is infinite . An infinite set that can be put into a one-to-one
correspondence with the natural numbers ℕ  is countably infinite , and
otherwise, it is uncountable . For example, the integers ℤ  are countable, but
the reals ℝ  are uncountable.
For any two finite sets A  and B , we have the identity
from which we can conclude that
| A  ∪  B | ≤ | A | + | B |.
Page number: 1351
If A  and B  are disjoint, then | A  ∩ B | = 0 and thus | A  ∪  B | = | A | + | B |. If A  ⊆
B , then | A | ≤ | B |.
A finite set of n  elements is sometimes called an n-set . A 1-set is called
a singleton . A subset of k  elements of a set is sometimes called a k-subset .
W e denote the set of all subsets of a set S , including the empty set and S
itself, by 2S, called the power set  of S . For example, 2{ a , b } = {Ø, { a }, { b },
{ a, b }}. The power set of a finite set S  has cardinality 2| S | (see Exercise B.1-
5).
W e sometimes care about setlike structures in which the elements are
ordered. An ordered pair  of two elements a  and b  is denoted ( a , b ) and is
defined formally as the set ( a , b ) = { a,  { a, b }}. Thus, the ordered pair ( a , b )
is not  the same as the ordered pair ( b , a ).
The Cartesian product  of two sets A  and B , denoted A  × B , is the set of
all ordered pairs such that the first element of the pair is an element of A
and the second is an element of B . More formally ,
A  × B  = {( a , b ) : a  ∈  A  and b  ∈  B }.
For example, { a, b }×{ a, b, c } = {( a , a ), ( a, b ), ( a, c ), ( b, a ), ( b, b ), ( b, c )}.
When A  and B  are finite sets, the cardinality of their Cartesian product is
The Cartesian product of n  sets A1 , A2 , … , An  is the set of n-tuples
A1  × A2  × … × An  = {( a1 , a2 , … , an ) : ai  ∈  Ai  for i  = 1, 2, … , n },
whose cardinality is
| A1  × A2  × … × An | = | A1 | · | A2 | · | An |
if all sets Ai  are finite. W e denote an n -fold Cartesian product over a single
set A  by the set
whose cardinality is | An| = | A |n if A  is finite. W e can also view an n -tuple as
a finite sequence of length n  (see page 1 162).
Intervals are continuous sets of real numbers. W e denote them with
parentheses and/or brackets. Given real numbers a  and b , the closed
interval  [ a, b ] is the set { x  ∈  ℝ  : a  ≤ x  ≤ b } of reals between a  and b ,
Page number: 1352
including both a  and b . (If a  > b , this definition implies that [ a, b ] = Ø.) The
open interval  ( a , b ) = { x  ∈  ℝ  : a  < x  < b } omits both of the endpoints from
the set. There are two half-open intervals  [ a, b ) = { x  ∈  ℝ  : a  ≤ x  < b } and
( a , b ] = { x  ∈  ℝ  : a  < x  ≤ b }, each of which excludes one endpoint.
Intervals can also be defined on the integers by replacing ℝ  in the these
definitions by ℤ . Whether the interval is defined over the reals or integers
can usually be inferred from context.
Exer cises
B.1-1
Draw V enn diagrams that illustrate the first of the distributive laws (B.1).
B.1-2
Prove the generalization of DeMor gan’ s laws to any finite collection of sets:
A 1  ∩ A 2  ∩ … ∩ A n = A 1  ∪  A 2  ∪  … ∪  A n ,
A 1  ∪  A 2  ∪  … ∪  A n= A 1  ∩ A 2  ∩ … ∩ A n .
★  B.1-3
Prove the generalization of equation (B.3), which is called the principle of
inclusion and exclusion :
| A 1  ∪  A 2  ∪  … ∪  A n | =
| A 1 | + | A 2 | + … + | A n |
− | A 1  ∩ A 2 | − | A 1  ∩ A 3 | − … (all pairs)
+ | A 1  ∩ A 2  ∩ A 3 | + … (all triples)
⋮
+ (−1)n −1 | A 1  ∩ A 2  ∩ … ∩ A n |.
B.1-4
Show that the set of odd natural numbers is countable.
B.1-5
Show that for any finite set S , the power set 2S has 2| S | elements (that is,
there are 2| S | distinct subsets of S ).
B.1-6
Page number: 1353
Give an inductive definition for an n -tuple by extending the set-theoretic
definition for an ordered pair .
B.2 Relations
A binary relation  R  on two sets A  and B  is a subset of the Cartesian product
A × B . If ( a , b ) ∈  R , we sometimes write a R b . When we say that R  is a
binary relation on a set A , we mean that R  is a subset of A  × A . For example,
the “less than” relation on the natural numbers is the set {( a , b ) : a, b  ∈  ℕ
and a  < b }. An n -ary relation on sets A1 , A2 , … , An  is a subset of A1  × A2  ×
… × An .
A binary relation R  ⊆  A  × A  is reflexive  if
a R a
for all a  ∈  A . For example, “=” and “≤” are reflexive relations on ℕ , but
“<” is not. The relation R  is symmetric  if
a R b  implies b R a
for all a, b  ∈  A . For example, “=” is symmetric, but “<” and “≤” are not.
The relation R  is transitive  if
a R b  and b R c  imply a R c
for all a, b, c  ∈  A . For example, the relations “<,” “≤,” and “=” are
transitive, but the relation R  = {( a , b ) : a, b  ∈  ℕ  and a  = b  − 1} is not, since
3 R  4 and 4 R  5 do not imply 3 R  5.
A relation that is reflexive, symmetric, and transitive is an equivalence
relation . For example, “=” is an equivalence relation on the natural
numbers, but “<” is not. If R  is an equivalence relation on a set A , then for a
∈  A , the equivalence class  of a  is the set [ a ] = { b  ∈  A  : a R b }, that is, the
set of all elements equivalent to a . For example, if we define R  = {( a , b ) : a,
b  ∈  ℕ  and a  + b  is an even number}, then R  is an equivalence relation,
since a  + a  is even (reflexive), a  + b  is even implies b  + a  is even
(symmetric), and a  + b  is even and b  + c  is even imply a  + c  is even
(transitive). The equivalence class of 4 is [4] = {0, 2, 4, 6,…}, and the
equivalence class of 3 is [3] = {1, 3, 5, 7,…}. A basic theorem of
equivalence classes is the following.
Page number: 1354
Theorem B.1 (An equivalence relation is the same as a partition)
The equivalence classes of any equivalence relation R  on a set A  form a
partition of A , and any partition of A  determines an equivalence relation on
A  for which the sets in the partition are the equivalence classes.
Proof    For the first part of the proof, we must show that the equivalence
classes of R  are nonempty , pairwise-disjoint sets whose union is A . Because
R  is reflexive, a  ∈  [ a ], and so the equivalence classes are nonempty .
Moreover , since every element a  ∈  A  belongs to the equivalence class [ a ],
the union of the equivalence classes is A . It remains to show that the
equivalence classes are pairwise disjoint, that is, if two equivalence classes
[ a ] and [ b ] have an element c  in common, then they are in fact the same set.
Suppose that a R c  and b R c . Symmetry gives that c R b  and, by transitivity ,
a R b . Thus, we have x R a  for any arbitrary element x  ∈  [ a ] and, by
transitivity , x R b , and thus [ a ] ⊆  [ b ]. Similarly , [ b ] ⊆  [ a ], and thus [ a ] =
[ b ].
For the second part of the proof, let A  = { Ai } be a partition of A , and
define R  = {( a , b ) : there exists i  such that a  ∈  Ai  and b  ∈  Ai }. W e claim
that R  is an equivalence relation on A . Reflexivity holds, since a  ∈  Ai
implies a R a . Symmetry holds, because if a R b , then a  and b  belong to the
same set Ai , and hence b R a . If a R b  and b R c , then all three elements are
in the same set Ai , and thus a R c  and transitivity holds. T o see that the sets
in the partition are the equivalence classes of R , observe that if a  ∈  Ai , then
x  ∈  [ a ] implies x  ∈  Ai , and x  ∈  Ai  implies x  ∈  [ a ].
▪
A binary relation R  on a set A  is antisymmetric  if
a R b  and b R a  imply a  = b .
For example, the “≤” relation on the natural numbers is antisymmetric,
since a  ≤ b  and b  ≤ a  imply a  = b . A relation that is reflexive,
antisymmetric, and transitive is a partial order , and we call a set on which a
partial order is defined a partially ordered set . For example, the relation “is
a descendant of” is a partial order on the set of all people (if we view
individuals as being their own descendants).
Page number: 1355
In a partially ordered set A , there may be no single “maximum” element
a  such that b R a  for all b  ∈  A . Instead, the set may contain several
maximal  elements a  such that for no b  ∈  A , where b  ≠ a , is it the case that
a R b . For example, a collection of dif ferent-sized boxes may contain
several maximal boxes that don’ t fit inside any other box, yet it has no
single “maximum” box into which any other box will fit.3
A relation R  on a set A  is a total relation  if for all a, b  ∈  A , we have a R
b  or b R a  (or both), that is, if every pairing of elements of A  is related by R .
A partial order that is also a total relation is a total order  or linear order .
For example, the relation “≤” is a total order on the natural numbers, but the
“is a descendant of” relation is not a total order on the set of all people,
since there are individuals neither of whom is descended from the other . A
total relation that is transitive, but not necessarily either symmetric or
antisymmetric, is a total preorder .
Exer cises
B.2-1
Prove that the subset relation “ ⊆ ” on all subsets of ℤ  is a partial order but
not a total order .
B.2-2
Show that for any positive integer n , the relation “equivalent modulo n ” is
an equivalence relation on the integers. (W e say that a  = b  (mod n ) if there
exists an integer q  such that a  − b  = qn .) Into what equivalence classes does
this relation partition the integers?
B.2-3
Give examples of relations that are
a.  reflexive and symmetric but not transitive,
b.  reflexive and transitive but not symmetric,
c.  symmetric and transitive but not reflexive.
B.2-4
Let S  be a finite set, and let R  be an equivalence relation on S  × S . Show
that if in addition R  is antisymmetric, then the equivalence classes of S  with
respect to R  are singletons.
Page number: 1356
B.2-5
Professor Narcissus claims that if a relation R  is symmetric and transitive,
then it is also reflexive. He of fers the following proof. By symmetry , a R b
implies b R a . T ransitivity , therefore, implies a R a . Is the professor correct?
B.3 Functions
Given two sets A  and B , a function  f  is a binary relation on A  and B  such
that for all a  ∈  A , there exists precisely one b  ∈  B  such that ( a , b ) ∈  f . The
set A  is called the domain  of f , and the set B  is called the codomain  of f . W e
sometimes write f  : A  → B , and if ( a , b ) ∈  f , we write b  = f  ( a ), since the
choice of a  uniquely determines b .
Intuitively , the function f  assigns an element of B  to each element of A .
No element of A  is assigned two dif ferent elements of B , but the same
element of B  can be assigned to two dif ferent elements of A . For example,
the binary relation
f  = {( a , b ) : a, b  ∈  ℕ  and b  = a  mod 2}
is a function f  : → {0, 1}, since for each natural number a , there is exactly
one value b  in {0, 1} such that b  = a  mod 2. For this example, 0 = f  (0), 1 =
f  (1), 0 = f  (2), 1 = f  (3), etc. In contrast, the binary relation
g  = {( a , b ) : a, b  ∈  ℕ  and a  + b  is even}
is not a function, since (1, 3) and (1, 5) are both in g , and thus for the choice
a  = 1, there is not precisely one b  such that ( a , b ) ∈  g .
Given a function f  : A  → B , if b  = f  ( a ), we say that a  is the argument  of
f  and that b  is the value  of f  at a . W e can define a function by stating its
value for every element of its domain. For example, we might define f  ( n ) =
2 n  for n  ∈  ℕ , which means f  = {( n , 2 n ) : n  ∈  ℕ }. T wo functions f  and g  are
equal  if they have the same domain and codomain and if f  ( a ) = g ( a ) for all
a  in the domain.
A finite sequence  of length n  is a function f  whose domain is the set of n
integers {0, 1, … , n  − 1}. W e often denote a finite sequence by listing its
values in angle brackets: 〈 f  (0), f  (1), … , f  ( n −1) 〉 . An infinite sequence  is a
function whose domain is the set ℕ  of natural numbers. For example, the
Page number: 1357
Fibonacci sequence, defined by recurrence (3.31), is the infinite sequence
〈 0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21,… 〉 .
When the domain of a function f  is a Cartesian product, we often omit
the extra parentheses surrounding the ar gument of f . For example, if we
have a function f  : A1  × A2  × … An  → B , we write b  = f  ( a1 , a2 , … an )
instead of writing b  = f  (( a1 , a2 , … an )). W e also call each ai  an argument  to
the function f , though technically f  has just a single ar gument, which is the
n -tuple ( a1 , a2 , … an ).
If f  : A  → B  is a function and b  = f  ( a ), then we sometimes say that b  is
the image  of a  under f . The image of a set A ′ ⊆  A  under f  is defined by
f  ( A ′) = { b  ∈  B  : b  = f  ( a ) for some a  ∈  A ′}.
The range  of f  is the image of its domain, that is, f  ( A ). For example, the
range of the function f  : ℕ  → ℕ  defined by f  ( n ) = 2 n  is f ( ℕ ) = { m  : m  = 2 n
for some n  ∈  ℕ }, in other words, the set of nonnegative even integers.
A function is a surjection  if its range is its codomain. For example, the
function f  ( n ) = ⌊ n /2 ⌋  is a surjective function from ℕ  to ℕ , since every
element in ℕ  appears as the value of f  for some ar gument. In contrast, the
function f  ( n ) = 2 n  is not a surjective function from ℕ  to ℕ , since no
ar gument to f  can produce any odd natural number as a value. The function
f  ( n ) = 2 n  is, however , a surjective function from the natural numbers to the
even numbers. A surjection f  : A  → B  is sometimes described as mapping A
onto  B . When we say that f  is onto, we mean that it is surjective.
A function f  : A  → B  is an injection  if distinct ar guments to f  produce
distinct values, that is, if a  ≠ a ′ implies f  ( a ) ≠ f  ( a ′). For example, the
function f  ( n ) = 2 n  is an injective function from ℕ  to ℕ , since each even
number b  is the image under f  of at most one element of the domain,
namely b /2. The function f  ( n ) = ⌊ n /2 ⌋  is not injective, since the value 1 is
produced by two ar guments: f  (2) = 1 and f  (3) = 1. An injection is
sometimes called a one-to-one  function.
A function f  : A  → B  is a bijection  if it is injective and surjective. For
example, the function f  ( n ) = (−1)n⌈ n /2 ⌉  is a bijection from ℕ  to ℤ :
0 → 0,
1 → −1,
2 → 1,
3 → −2,
Page number: 1358
4 → 2,
⋮
The function is injective, since no element of ℤ  is the image of more than
one element of ℕ . It is surjective, since every element of ℤ  appears as the
image of some element of ℕ . Hence, the function is bijective. A bijection is
sometimes called a one-to-one correspondence , since it pairs elements in
the domain and codomain. A bijection from a set A  to itself is sometimes
called a permutation .
When a function f  is bijective, we define its inverse  f−1 as
f  −1( b ) = a  if and only if f  ( a ) = b .
For example, the inverse of the function f  ( n ) = (−1)n⌈ n /2 ⌉  is
Exer cises
B.3-1
Let A  and B  be finite sets, and let f  : A  → B  be a function. Show the
following:
a.  If f  is injective, then | A | ≤ | B |.
b.  If f  is surjective, then | A | ≥ | B |.
B.3-2
Is the function f  ( x ) = x  + 1 bijective when the domain and the codomain are
the set ℕ ? Is it bijective when the domain and the codomain are the set ℤ ?
B.3-3
Give a natural definition for the inverse of a binary relation such that if a
relation is in fact a bijective function, its relational inverse is its functional
inverse.
★  B.3-4
Give a bijection from ℤ  to ℤ  × ℤ .
B.4 Graphs
Page number: 1359
This section presents two kinds of graphs: directed and undirected. Certain
definitions in the literature dif fer from those given here, but for the most
part, the dif ferences are slight. Section 20.1  shows how to represent graphs
in computer memory .
A directed graph  (or digraph ) G  is a pair ( V , E ), where V  is a finite set
and E  is a binary relation on V . The set V  is called the vertex set  of G , and
its elements are called vertices  (singular: vertex ). The set E  is called the
edge set  of G , and its elements are called edges . Figure B.2(a)  is a pictorial
representation of a directed graph on the vertex set {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6}.
V ertices are represented by circles in the figure, and edges are represented
by arrows. Self-loops —edges from a vertex to itself—are possible.
In an undirected graph  G  = ( V , E ), the edge set E  consists of unor der ed
pairs of vertices, rather than ordered pairs. That is, an edge is a set { u, v },
where u, v  ∈  V  and u  ≠ v . By convention, we use the notation ( u , v ) for an
edge, rather than the set notation { u, v }, and we consider ( u , v ) and ( v , u ) to
be the same edge. In an undirected graph, self-loops are forbidden, so that
every edge consists of two distinct vertices. Figure B.2(b)  shows an
undirected graph on the vertex set {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6}.
Figur e B.2  Directed and undirected graphs. (a)  A directed graph G  = ( V , E ), where V  = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6} and E  = {(1, 2), (2, 2), (2, 4), (2, 5), (4, 1), (4, 5), (5, 4), (6, 3)}. The edge (2, 2) is a self-loop. (b)
An undirected graph G  = ( V , E ), where V  = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6} and E  = {(1, 2), (1, 5), (2, 5), (3, 6)}.
The vertex 4 is isolated. (c)  The subgraph of the graph in part (a) induced by the vertex set {1, 2, 3,
6}.
Many definitions for directed and undirected graphs are the same,
although certain terms have slightly dif ferent meanings in the two contexts.
If ( u , v ) is an edge in a directed graph G  = ( V , E ), we say that ( u , v ) is
incident from  or leaves  vertex u  and is incident to  or enters  vertex v . For
example, the edges leaving vertex 2 in Figure B.2(a)  are (2, 2), (2, 4), and
(2, 5). The edges entering vertex 2 are (1, 2) and (2, 2). If ( u , v ) is an edge
in an undirected graph G  = ( V , E ), we say that ( u , v ) is incident on  vertices
Page number: 1360
u  and v . In Figure B.2(b) , the edges incident on vertex 2 are (1, 2) and (2,
5).
If ( u , v ) is an edge in a graph G  = ( V , E ), we say that vertex v  is adjacent
to vertex u . When the graph is undirected, the adjacency relation is
symmetric. When the graph is directed, the adjacency relation is not
necessarily symmetric. If v  is adjacent to u  in a directed graph, we can write
u  → v . In parts (a) and (b) of Figure B.2 , vertex 2 is adjacent to vertex 1,
since the edge (1, 2) belongs to both graphs. V ertex 1 is not  adjacent to
vertex 2 in Figure B.2(a) , since the edge (2, 1) is absent.
The degree  of a vertex in an undirected graph is the number of edges
incident on it. For example, vertex 2 in Figure B.2(b)  has degree 2. A vertex
whose degree is 0, such as vertex 4 in Figure B.2(b) , is isolated . In a
directed graph, the out-degree  of a vertex is the number of edges leaving it,
and the in-degree  of a vertex is the number of edges entering it. The degree
of a vertex in a directed graph is its in-degree plus its out-degree. V ertex 2
in Figure B.2(a)  has in-degree 2, out-degree 3, and degree 5.
A path  of length  k  from a vertex u  to a vertex u ′ in a graph G  = ( V , E ) is
a sequence 〈 v0 , v1 , v2 , … , vk〉  of vertices such that u  = v0 , u ′ = vk , and ( vi −1 ,
vi ) ∈  E  for i  = 1, 2, … , k . The length of the path is the number of edges in
the path, which is 1 less than the number of vertices in the path. The path
contains  the vertices v0 , v1 , … , vk  and the edges ( v0 , v1 ), ( v1 , v2 ), … , ( vk −1 ,
vk ). (There is always a 0-length path from u  to u .) If there is a path p  from u
to u ′, we say that u ′ is reachable  from u  via p , which we can write as 
 .
A path is simple4 if all vertices in the path are distinct. In Figure B.2(a) , the
path 〈 1, 2, 5, 4 〉  is a simple path of length 3. The path 〈 2, 5, 4, 5 〉  is not
simple. A subpath  of path p  = 〈 v0 , v1 , … , vk〉  is a contiguous subsequence
of its vertices. That is, for any 0 ≤ i  ≤ j  ≤ k , the subsequence of vertices 〈 vi ,
vi +1 , … , vj〉  is a subpath of p .
In a directed graph, a path 〈 v0 , v1 , … , vk〉  forms a cycle  if v0  = vk  and the
path contains at least one edge. The cycle is simple  if, in addition, v1 , v2 , …
, vk  are distinct. A cycle consisting of k  vertices has length  k . A self-loop is
a cycle of length 1. T wo paths 〈 v0 , v1 , v2 , … , vk −1 , v0〉  and 
 form the same cycle if there exists an integer j  such that 
 for i  = 0, 1, … , k −1. In Figure B.2(a) , the path 〈 1,2,4,1 〉  forms
the same cycle as the paths 〈 2, 4, 1, 2 〉  and 〈 4, 1, 2, 4 〉 . This cycle is simple,
Page number: 1361
but the cycle 〈 1, 2, 4, 5, 4, 1 〉  is not. The cycle 〈 2, 2 〉  formed by the edge (2,
2) is a self-loop. A directed graph with no self-loops is simple . In an
undirected graph, a path 〈 v0 , v1 , …, vk〉  forms a cycle  if k  > 0, v0  = vk , and
all edges on the path are distinct. The cycle is simple  if v1 , v2 , … , vk  are
distinct. For example, in Figure B.2(b) , the path 〈 1, 2, 5, 1 〉  is a simple
cycle. A graph with no simple cycles is acyclic .
An undirected graph is connected  if every vertex is reachable from all
other vertices. The connected components  of an undirected graph are the
equivalence classes of vertices under the “is reachable from” relation. The
graph shown in Figure B.2(b)  has three connected components: {1, 2, 5},
{3, 6}, and {4}. Every vertex in the connected component {1, 2, 5} is
reachable from every other vertex in {1, 2, 5}. An undirected graph is
connected if it has exactly one connected component. The edges of a
connected component are those that are incident on only the vertices of the
component. In other words, edge ( u , v ) is an edge of a connected
component only if both u  and v  are vertices of the component.
A directed graph is strongly connected  if every two vertices are
reachable from each other . The strongly connected components  of a
directed graph are the equivalence classes of vertices under the “are
mutually reachable” relation. A directed graph is strongly connected if it
has only one strongly connected component. The graph in Figure B.2(a)  has
three strongly connected components: {1, 2, 4, 5}, {3}, and {6}. All pairs
of vertices in {1, 2, 4, 5} are mutually reachable. The vertices {3, 6} do not
form a strongly connected component, since vertex 6 cannot be reached
from vertex 3.
T wo graphs G  = ( V , E ) and G ′ = ( V ′, E ′) are isomorphic  if there exists a
bijection f  : V  → V ′ such that ( u , v ) ∈  E  if and only if ( f  ( u ), f  ( v )) ∈  E ′. In
other words, G  and G ′ are isomorphic if the vertices of G  can be relabeled
to be vertices of G ′, maintaining the corresponding edges in G  and G ′.
Figure B.3(a)  shows a pair of isomorphic graphs G  and G ′ with respective
vertex sets V  = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6} and V ′ = { u, v , w , x, y , z }. The mapping
from V  to V ′ given by f  (1) = u, f  (2) = v , f  (3) = w , f  (4) = x, f  (5) = y , f  (6) =
z  provides the required bijective function. The graphs in Figure B.3(b)  are
not isomorphic. Although both graphs have 5 vertices and 7 edges, the top
graph has a vertex of degree 4 and the bottom graph does not.
Page number: 1362
W e say that a graph G ′ = ( V ′, E ′) is a subgraph  of G  = ( V , E ) if V ′ ⊆  V
and E ′ ⊆  E . Given a set V ′ ⊆  V , the subgraph of G induced  by V ′ is the
graph G ′ = ( V ′, E ′), where
E ′ = {( u , v ) ∈  E  : u, v  ∈  V ′}.
The subgraph induced by the vertex set {1, 2, 3, 6} in Figure B.2(a)  appears
in Figure B.2(c)  and has the edge set {(1, 2), (2, 2), (6, 3)}.
Given an undirected graph G  = ( V , E ), the directed version  of G  is the
directed graph G ′ = ( V , E ′), where ( u , v ) ∈  E ′ if and only if ( u , v ) ∈  E . That
is, each undirected edge ( u , v ) in G  turns into two directed edges, ( u , v ) and
( v , u ), in the directed version. Given a directed graph G  = ( V , E ), the
undirected version  of G  is the undirected graph G ′ = ( V , E ′), where ( u , v ) ∈
E ′ if and only if u  ≠ v  and E  contains at least one of the edges ( u , v ) and ( v ,
u ). That is, the undirected version contains the edges of G  “with their
directions removed” and with self-loops eliminated. (Since ( u , v ) and ( v , u )
are the same edge in an undirected graph, the undirected version of a
directed graph contains it only once, even if the directed graph contains
both edges ( u , v ) and ( v , u ).) In a directed graph G  = ( V , E ), a neighbor  of a
vertex u  is any vertex that is adjacent to u  in the undirected version of G .
That is, v  is a neighbor of u  if u  ≠ v  and either ( u , v ) ∈  E  or ( v , u ) ∈  E . In
an undirected graph, u  and v  are neighbors if they are adjacent.
Figur e B.3 (a)  A pair of isomorphic graphs. The vertices of the top graph are mapped to the vertices
of the bottom graph by f  (1) = u, f  (2) = v , f  (3) = w , f  (4) = x, f  (5) = y , f  (6) = z . (b)  T wo graphs that
are not isomorphic. The top graph has a vertex of degree 4, and the bottom graph does not.
Several kinds of graphs have special names. A complete graph  is an
undirected graph in which every pair of vertices is adjacent. An undirected
Page number: 1363
graph G  = ( V , E ) is bipartite  if V  can be partitioned into two sets V1  and V2
such that ( u , v ) ∈  E  implies either u  ∈  V1  and v  ∈  V2  or u  ∈  V2  and v  ∈
V1 . That is, all edges go between the two sets V1  and V2 . An acyclic,
undirected graph is a forest , and a connected, acyclic, undirected graph is a
(free) tree  (see Section B.5 ). W e often take the first letters of “directed
acyclic graph” and call such a graph a dag .
There are two variants of graphs that you may occasionally encounter . A
multigraph  is like an undirected graph, but it can have both multiple edges
between vertices (such as two distinct edges ( u , v ) and ( u , v )) and self-
loops. A hypergraph  is like an undirected graph, but each hyperedge , rather
than connecting two vertices, connects an arbitrary subset of vertices. Many
algorithms written for ordinary directed and undirected graphs can be
adapted to run on these graphlike structures.
The contraction  of an undirected graph G  = ( V , E ) by an edge e  = ( u , v )
is a graph G ′ = ( V ′, E ′), where V ′ = V  − { u, v } ∪  { x } and x  is a new vertex.
The set of edges E ′ is formed from E  by deleting the edge ( u , v ) and, for
each vertex w  adjacent to u  or v , deleting whichever of ( u , w ) and ( v , w )
belongs to E  and adding the new edge ( x , w ). In ef fect, u  and v  are
“contracted” into a single vertex.
Exer cises
B.4-1
Attendees of a faculty party shake hands to greet each other , with every pair
of professors shaking hands one time. Each professor remembers the
number of times he or she shook hands. At the end of the party , the
department head asks the professors for their totals and adds them all up.
Show that the result is even by proving the handshaking lemma : if G  = ( V ,
E ) is an undirected graph, then
B.4-2
Show that if a directed or undirected graph contains a path between two
vertices u  and v , then it contains a simple path between u  and v . Show that
if a directed graph contains a cycle, then it contains a simple cycle.
Page number: 1364
B.4-3
Show that any connected, undirected graph G  = ( V , E ) satisfies | E | ≥ | V  | −
1.
B.4-4
V erify that in an undirected graph, the “is reachable from” relation is an
equivalence relation on the vertices of the graph. Which of the three
properties of an equivalence relation hold in general for the “is reachable
from” relation on the vertices of a directed graph?
B.4-5
What is the undirected version of the directed graph in Figure B.2(a) ? What
is the directed version of the undirected graph in Figure B.2(b) ?
B.4-6
Show how a bipartite graph can represent a hyper graph by letting incidence
in the hyper graph correspond to adjacency in the bipartite graph. ( Hint:  Let
one set of vertices in the bipartite graph correspond to vertices of the
hyper graph, and let the other set of vertices of the bipartite graph
correspond to hyperedges.)
B.5 T r ees
As with graphs, there are many related, but slightly dif ferent, notions of
trees. This section presents definitions and mathematical properties of
several kinds of trees. Sections 10.3  and 20.1  describe how to represent
trees in computer memory .
B.5.1 Fr ee tr ees
As defined in Section B.4 , a free tree  is a connected, acyclic, undirected
graph. W e often omit the adjective “free” when we say that a graph is a tree.
If an undirected graph is acyclic but possibly disconnected, it is a forest .
Many algorithms that work for trees also work for forests. Figure B.4(a)
shows a free tree, and Figure B.4(b)  shows a forest. The forest in Figure
B.4(b)  is not a tree because it is not connected. The graph in Figure B.4(c)
is connected but neither a tree nor a forest, because it contains a cycle.
The following theorem captures many important facts about free trees.
Page number: 1365
Theorem B.2 (Properties of free trees)
Figur e B.4 (a)  A free tree. (b)  A forest. (c)  A graph that contains a cycle and is therefore neither a
tree nor a forest.
Let G  = ( V , E ) be an undirected graph. The following statements are
equivalent.
1 . G  is a free tree.
2 . Any two vertices in G  are connected by a unique simple path.
3 . G  is connected, but if any edge is removed from E , the resulting
graph is disconnected.
4 . G  is connected, and | E | = | V  | − 1.
5 . G  is acyclic, and | E | = | V  | − 1.
6 . G  is acyclic, but if any edge is added to E , the resulting graph
contains a cycle.
Figur e B.5  A step in the proof of Theorem B.2: if (1) G  is a free tree, then (2) any two vertices in G
are connected by a unique simple path. Assume for the sake of contradiction that vertices u  and v  are
connected by two distinct simple paths. These paths first diver ge at vertex w , and they first
reconver ge at vertex z . The path p ′ concatenated with the reverse of the path p ″ forms a cycle, which
yields the contradiction.
Proof    (1) ⇒  (2): Since a tree is connected, any two vertices in G  are
connected by at least one simple path. Suppose for the sake of contradiction
Page number: 1366
that vertices u  and v  are connected by two distinct simple paths as shown in
Figure B.5 . Let w  be the vertex at which the paths first diver ge. That is, if
we call the paths p1  and p2 , then w  is the first vertex on both p1  and p2
whose successor on p1  is x  and whose successor on p2  is y , where x  ≠ y . Let
z  be the first vertex at which the paths reconver ge, that is, z  is the first
vertex following w  on p1  that is also on p2 . Let p ′ = w  → x  ⇝  z  be the
subpath of p1  from w  through x  to z , so that 
 , and let p ″ =
w  → y  ⇝  z  be the subpath of p2  from w  through y  to z , so that 
. Paths p ′ and p ″ share no vertices except their endpoints.
Then, as Figure B.5  shows, the path obtained by concatenating p ′ and the
reverse of p ″ is a cycle, which contradicts our assumption that G  is a tree.
Thus, if G  is a tree, there can be at most one simple path between two
vertices.
(2) ⇒  (3): If any two vertices in G  are connected by a unique simple
path, then G  is connected. Let ( u , v ) be any edge in E . This edge is a path
from u  to v , and so it must be the unique path from u  to v . If ( u , v ) were to
be removed from G , there would be no path from u  to v , and G  would be
disconnected.
(3) ⇒  (4): By assumption, the graph G  is connected, so Exercise B.4-3
gives that | E | ≥ | V | − 1. W e prove | E | ≤ | V | − 1 by induction on | V |. The base
cases are when | V | = 1 or | V | = 2, and in either case, | E | = | V | − 1. For the
inductive step, suppose that | V | ≥ 3 for graph G  and that any graph G ′ = ( V ′,
E ′), where | V ′| < | V |, that satisfies (3) also satisfies | E ′| ≤ | V ′| − 1. Removing
an arbitrary edge from G  separates the graph into k  ≥ 2 connected
components (actually k  = 2). Each component satisfies (3), or else G  would
not satisfy (3). Consider each connected component Vi , with edge set Ei , as
a separate free tree. Then, because each connected component has fewer
than | V | vertices, the inductive hypothesis implies that | Ei | ≤ | Vi | − 1. Thus,
the number of edges in all k  connected components combined is at most | V |
− k  ≤ | V | − 2. Adding in the removed edge yields | E | ≤ | V | − 1.
(4) ⇒  (5): Suppose that G  is connected and that | E | = | V | − 1. W e must
show that G  is acyclic. Suppose that G  has a cycle containing k  vertices v1 ,
v2 , … , vk , and without loss of generality assume that this cycle is simple.
Let Gk  = ( Vk , Ek ) be the subgraph of G  consisting of the cycle, so that | Vk | =
| Ek | = k . If k  < | V |, then because G  is connected, there must be a vertex
Page number: 1367
vk +1 ∈  V  − Vk  that is adjacent to some vertex vi  ∈  Vk . Define Gk +1  = ( Vk +1 ,
Ek +1 ) to be the subgraph of G  with Vk +1  = Vk  ∪  { vk +1 } and Ek +1  = Ek  ∪  {( vi ,
vk +1 )}. Note that | Vk +1 | = | Ek +1 | = k  + 1. If k  + 1 < | V |, then continue, defining
Gk +2  in the same manner , and so forth, until we obtain Gn  = ( Vn , En ), where
n  = | V |, Vn  = V , and | En | = | Vn | = | V |. Since Gn  is a subgraph of G , we have
En  ⊆  E , and hence | E | ≥ | En | = | Vn | = | V |, which contradicts the assumption
that | E | = | V | − 1. Thus, G  is acyclic.
(5) ⇒  (6): Suppose that G  is acyclic and that | E | = | V | − 1. Let k  be the
number of connected components of G . Each connected component is a free
tree by definition, and since (1) implies (5), the sum of all edges in all
connected components of G  is | V | − k . Consequently , k  must equal 1, and G
is in fact a tree. Since (1) implies (2), any two vertices in G  are connected
by a unique simple path. Thus, adding any edge to G  creates a cycle.
(6) ⇒  (1): Suppose that G  is acyclic but that adding any edge to E
creates a cycle. W e must show that G  is connected. Let u  and v  be arbitrary
vertices in G . If u  and v  are not already adjacent, adding the edge ( u , v )
creates a cycle in which all edges but ( u , v ) belong to G . Thus, the cycle
minus edge ( u , v ) must contain a path from u  to v , and since u  and v  were
chosen arbitrarily , G  is connected.
▪
B.5.2 Rooted and order ed tr ees
A rooted tree  is a free tree in which one of the vertices is distinguished
from the others. W e call the distinguished vertex the root  of the tree. W e
often refer to a vertex of a rooted tree as a node5 of the tree. Figure B.6(a)
shows a rooted tree on a set of 12 nodes with root 7.
Page number: 1368
Figur e B.6  Rooted and ordered trees. (a)  A rooted tree with height 4. The tree is drawn in a standard
way: the root (node 7) is at the top, its children (nodes with depth 1) are beneath it, their children
(nodes with depth 2) are beneath them, and so forth. If the tree is ordered, the relative left-to-right
order of the children of a node matters; otherwise, it doesn’ t. (b)  Another rooted tree. As a rooted
tree, it is identical to the tree in (a), but as an ordered tree it is dif ferent, since the children of node 3
appear in a dif ferent order .
Consider a node x  in a rooted tree T  with root r . W e call any node y  on
the unique simple path from r  to x  an ancestor  of x . If y  is an ancestor of x ,
then x  is a descendant  of y . (Every node is both an ancestor and a
descendant of itself.) If y  is an ancestor of x  and x  ≠ y , then y  is a proper
ancestor  of x  and x  is a proper descendant  of y . The subtree rooted at x  is
the tree induced by descendants of x , rooted at x . For example, the subtree
rooted at node 8 in Figure B.6(a)  contains nodes 8, 6, 5, and 9.
If the last edge on the simple path from the root r  of a tree T  to a node x
is ( y , x ), then y  is the parent  of x , and x  is a child  of y . The root is the only
node in T  with no parent. If two nodes have the same parent, they are
siblings . A node with no children is a leaf  or external node . A nonleaf node
is an internal node .
The number of children of a node x  in a rooted tree T  is the degree  of x .6
The length of the simple path from the root r  to a node x  is the depth  of x  in
T . A level  of a tree consists of all nodes at the same depth. The height  of a
node in a tree is the number of edges on the longest simple downward path
from the node to a leaf, and the height of a tree is the height of its root. The
height of a tree is also equal to the lar gest depth of any node in the tree.
An ordered tree  is a rooted tree in which the children of each node are
ordered. That is, if a node has k  children, then there is a first child, a second
child, and so on, up to and including a k th child. The two trees in Figure B.6
Page number: 1369
are dif ferent when considered to be ordered trees, but the same when
considered to be just rooted trees.
B.5.3 Binary and positional tr ees
W e define binary trees recursively . A binary tree  T  is a structure defined on
a finite set of nodes that either
contains no nodes, or
is composed of three disjoint sets of nodes: a root  node, a binary tree
called its left subtree , and a binary tree called its right subtree .
The binary tree that contains no nodes is called the empty tree  or null tree ,
sometimes denoted NIL. If the left subtree is nonempty , its root is called the
left child  of the root of the entire tree. Likewise, the root of a nonnull right
subtree is the right child  of the root of the entire tree. If a subtree is the null
tree NIL, we say that the child is absent  or missing . Figure B.7(a)  shows a
binary tree.
A binary tree is not simply an ordered tree in which each node has
degree at most 2. For example, in a binary tree, if a node has just one child,
the position of the child—whether it is the left child  or the right child —
matters. In an ordered tree, there is no distinguishing a sole child as being
either left or right. Figure B.7(b)  shows a binary tree that dif fers from the
tree in Figure B.7(a)  because of the position of one node. Considered as
ordered trees, however , the two trees are identical.
One way to represent the positioning information in a binary tree is by
the internal nodes of an ordered tree, as shown in Figure B.7(c) . The idea is
to replace each missing child in the binary tree with a node having no
children. These leaf nodes are drawn as squares in the figure. The tree that
results is a full binary tree : each node is either a leaf or has degree exactly
2. No nodes have degree 1. Consequently , the order of the children of a
node preserves the position information.
Page number: 1370
Figur e B.7  Binary trees. (a)  A binary tree drawn in a standard way . The left child of a node is drawn
beneath the node and to the left. The right child is drawn beneath and to the right. (b)  A binary tree
dif ferent from the one in (a). In (a), the left child of node 7 is 5 and the right child is absent. In (b),
the left child of node 7 is absent and the right child is 5. As ordered trees, these trees are the same,
but as binary trees, they are distinct. (c)  The binary tree in (a) represented by the internal nodes of a
full binary tree: an ordered tree in which each internal node has degree 2. The leaves in the tree are
shown as squares.
The positioning information that distinguishes binary trees from ordered
trees extends to trees with more than two children per node. In a positional
tree , the children of a node are labeled with distinct positive integers. The
i th child of a node is absent  if no child is labeled with integer i . A k-ary  tree
is a positional tree in which for every node, all children with labels greater
than k  are missing. Thus, a binary tree is a k -ary tree with k  = 2.
A complete k-ary tree  is a k -ary tree in which all leaves have the same
depth and all internal nodes have degree k . Figure B.8  shows a complete
binary tree of height 3. How many leaves does a complete k -ary tree of
height h  have? The root has k  children at depth 1, each of which has k
children at depth 2, etc. Thus, the number of nodes at depth d  is kd. In a
complete k -ary tree with height h , the leaves are at depth h , so that there are
kh leaves. Consequently , the height of a complete k -ary tree with n  leaves is
logk n . A complete k -ary tree of height h  has
internal nodes. Thus, a complete binary tree has 2h − 1 internal nodes.
Page number: 1371
Figur e B.8  A complete binary tree of height 3 with 8 leaves and 7 internal nodes.
Exer cises
B.5-1
Draw all the free trees composed of the three vertices x , y , and z . Draw all
the rooted trees with nodes x , y , and z  with x  as the root. Draw all the
ordered trees with nodes x , y , and z  with x  as the root. Draw all the binary
trees with nodes x , y , and z  with x  as the root.
B.5-2
Let G  = ( V , E ) be a directed acyclic graph in which there is a vertex v0  ∈  V
such that there exists a unique path from v0  to every vertex v  ∈  V . Prove
that the undirected version of G  forms a tree.
B.5-3
Show by induction that the number of degree-2 nodes in any nonempty
binary tree is one less than the number of leaves. Conclude that the number
of internal nodes in a full binary tree is one less than the number of leaves.
B.5-4
Prove that for any integer k  ≥ 1, there is a full binary tree with k  leaves.
B.5-5
Use induction to show that a nonempty binary tree with n  nodes has height
at least ⌊ lg n ⌋ .
★  B.5-6
The internal path length  of a full binary tree is the sum, taken over all
internal nodes of the tree, of the depth of each node. Likewise, the external
Page number: 1372
path length  is the sum, taken over all leaves of the tree, of the depth of each
leaf. Consider a full binary tree with n  internal nodes, internal path length i ,
and external path length e . Prove that e  = i  + 2 n .
★  B.5-7
Associate a “weight” w ( x ) = 2− d with each leaf x  of depth d  in a binary tree
T , and let L  be the set of leaves of T . Prove the Kraft inequality : Σx ∈ L  w ( x )
≤ 1.
★  B.5-8
Show that if L  ≥ 2, then every binary tree with L  leaves contains a subtree
having between L /3 and 2 L /3 leaves, inclusive.
Pr oblems
B-1 Graph coloring
A k-coloring  of undirected graph G  = ( V , E ) is a function c  : V  → {1, 2, … ,
k } such that c ( u ) ≠ c ( v ) for every edge ( u , v ) ∈  E . In other words, the
numbers 1, 2, … , k  represent the k  colors, and adjacent vertices must have
dif ferent colors.
a.  Show that any tree is 2-colorable.
b.  Show that the following are equivalent:
1 . G  is bipartite.
2 . G  is 2-colorable.
3 . G  has no cycles of odd length.
c.  Let d  be the maximum degree of any vertex in a graph G . Prove that G
can be colored with d  + 1 colors.
d.  Show that if G  has O (| V |) edges, then G  can be colored with 
colors.
B-2 Friendly graphs
Reword each of the following statements as a theorem about undirected
graphs, and then prove it. Assume that friendship is symmetric but not
Page number: 1373
reflexive.
a.  Any group of at least two people contains at least two people with the
same number of friends in the group.
b.  Every group of six people contains either at least three mutual friends or
at least three mutual strangers.
c.  Any group of people can be partitioned into two subgroups such that at
least half the friends of each person belong to the subgroup of which that
person is not  a member .
d.  If everyone in a group is the friend of at least half the people in the
group, then the group can be seated around a table in such a way that
everyone is seated between two friends.
B-3 Bisecting trees
Many divide-and-conquer algorithms that operate on graphs require that the
graph be bisected into two nearly equal-sized subgraphs, which are induced
by a partition of the vertices. This problem investigates bisections of trees
formed by removing a small number of edges. W e require that whenever
two vertices end up in the same subtree after removing edges, then they
must belong to the same partition.
a.  Show that the vertices of any n -vertex binary tree can be partitioned into
two sets A  and B , such that | A | ≤ 3 n /4 and | B | ≤ 3 n /4, by removing a single
edge.
b.  Show that the constant 3/4 in part (a) is optimal in the worst case by
giving an example of a simple binary tree whose most evenly balanced
partition upon removal of a single edge has | A | = 3 n /4.
c.  Show that by removing at most O (lg n ) edges, we can partition the
vertices of any n -vertex binary tree into two sets A  and B  such that | A | =
⌊ n /2 ⌋  and | B | = ⌈ n /2 ⌉ .
Appendix notes
G. Boole pioneered the development of symbolic logic, and he introduced
many of the basic set notations in a book published in 1854. Modern set
Page number: 1374
theory was created by G. Cantor during the period 1874–1895. Cantor
focused primarily on sets of infinite cardinality . The term “function” is
attributed to G. W . Leibniz, who used it to refer to several kinds of
mathematical formulas. His limited definition has been generalized many
times. Graph theory originated in 1736, when L. Euler proved that it was
impossible to cross each of the seven bridges in the city of Königsber g
exactly once and return to the starting point.
The book by Harary [ 208 ] provides a useful compendium of many
definitions and results from graph theory .
1 A variation of a set, which can contain the same object more than once, is called a multiset .
2 Some authors start the natural numbers with 1 instead of 0. The modern trend seems to be to start
with 0.
3 T o be precise, in order for the “fit inside” relation to be a partial order , we need to view a box as
fitting inside itself.
4 Some authors refer to what we call a path as a “walk” and to what we call a simple path as just a
“path.”
5 The term “node” is often used in the graph theory literature as a synonym for “vertex.” W e reserve
the term “node” to mean a vertex of a rooted tree.
6 The degree of a node depends on whether we consider T  to be a rooted tree or a free tree. The
degree of a vertex in a free tree is, as in any undirected graph, the number of adjacent vertices. In a
rooted tree, however , the degree is the number of children—the parent of a node does not count
toward its degree.
Page number: 1375
C Counting and Pr obability
This appendix reviews elementary combinatorics and probability theory . If
you have a good background in these areas, you may want to skim the
beginning of this appendix lightly and concentrate on the later sections.
Most of this book’ s chapters do not require probability , but for some
chapters it is essential.
Section C.1  reviews elementary results in counting theory , including
standard formulas for counting permutations and combinations. The axioms
of probability and basic facts concerning probability distributions form
Section C.2 . Random variables are introduced in Section C.3 , along with
the properties of expectation and variance. Section C.4  investigates the
geometric and binomial distributions that arise from studying Bernoulli
trials. The study of the binomial distribution continues in Section C.5 , an
advanced discussion of the “tails” of the distribution.
C.1 Counting
Counting theory tries to answer the question “How many?” without actually
enumerating all the choices. For example, you might ask, “How many
dif ferent n -bit numbers are there?” or “How many orderings of n  distinct
elements are there?” This section reviews the elements of counting theory .
Since some of the material assumes a basic understanding of sets, you
might wish to start by reviewing the material in Section B.1 .
Rules of sum and pr oduct
Page number: 1376
W e can sometimes express a set of items that we wish to count as a union of
disjoint sets or as a Cartesian product of sets.
The rule of sum  says that the number of ways to choose one element
from one of two disjoint  sets is the sum of the cardinalities of the sets. That
is, if A  and B  are two finite sets with no members in common, then | A  ∪  B |
= | A | + | B |, which follows from equation (B.3) on page 1 156. For example,
if each position on a car ’ s license plate is a letter or a digit, then the number
of possibilities for each position is 26 + 10 = 36, since there are 26 choices
if it is a letter and 10 choices if it is a digit.
The rule of product  says that the number of ways to choose an ordered
pair is the number of ways to choose the first element times the number of
ways to choose the second element. That is, if A  and B  are two finite sets,
then | A  × B | = | A |·| B |, which is simply equation (B.4) on page 1 157. For
example, if an ice-cream parlor of fers 28 flavors of ice cream and four
toppings, the number of possible sundaes with one scoop of ice cream and
one topping is 28 · 4 = 1 12.
Strings
A string  over a finite set S  is a sequence of elements of S . For example,
there are eight binary strings of length 3:
000, 001, 010, 01 1, 100, 101, 1 10, 1 1 1.
(Here we use the shorthand of omitting the angle brackets when denoting a
sequence.) W e sometimes call a string of length k  a k-string . A substring  s ′
of a string s  is an ordered sequence of consecutive elements of s . A k-
substring  of a string is a substring of length k . For example, 010 is a 3-
substring of 01 101001 (the 3-substring that begins in position 4), but 1 1 1 is
not a substring of 01 101001.
W e can view a k -string over a set S  as an element of the Cartesian
product Sk of k -tuples, which means that there are | S |k strings of length k .
For example, the number of binary k -strings is 2k. Intuitively , to construct a
k -string over an n -set, there are n  ways to pick the first element; for each of
these choices, there are n  ways to pick the second element; and so forth k
times. This construction leads to the k -fold product 
  as the
number of k -strings.
Page number: 1377
Permutations
A permutation  of a finite set S  is an ordered sequence of all the elements of
S , with each element appearing exactly once. For example, if S  = { a , b , c },
then S  has 6 permutations:
abc , acb , bac , bca , cab , cba .
(Again, we use the shorthand of omitting the angle brackets when denoting
a sequence.) There are n ! permutations of a set of n  elements, since there
are n  ways to choose the first element of the sequence, n  − 1 ways for the
second element, n  − 2 ways for the third, and so on.
A k-permutation  of S  is an ordered sequence of k  elements of S , with no
element appearing more than once in the sequence. (Thus, an ordinary
permutation is an n -permutation of an n -set.) Here are the 2-permutations of
the set { a , b , c , d }:
ab , ac , ad , ba , bc , bd , ca , cb , cd , da , db , dc .
The number of k -permutations of an n -set is
since there are n  ways to choose the first element, n  − 1 ways to choose the
second element, and so on, until k  elements are chosen, with the last
element chosen from the remaining n  − k  + 1 elements. For the above
example, with n  = 4 and k  = 2, the formula (C.1) evaluates to 4!/2! = 12,
matching the number of 2-permutations listed.
Combinations
A k-combination  of an n -set S  is simply a k -subset of S . For example, the 4-
set { a, b, c, d } has six 2-combinations:
ab , ac , ad , bc , bd , cd .
(Here we use the shorthand of omitting the braces around each subset.) T o
construct a k -combination of an n -set, choose k  distinct (dif ferent) elements
from the n -set. The order of selecting the elements does not matter .
W e can express the number of k -combinations of an n -set in terms of the
number of k -permutations of an n -set. Every k -combination has exactly k !
permutations of its elements, each of which is a distinct k -permutation of
Page number: 1378
the n -set. Thus the number of k -combinations of an n -set is the number of k -
permutations divided by k !. From equation (C.1), this quantity is
For k  = 0, this formula tells us that the number of ways to choose 0
elements from an n -set is 1 (not 0), since 0! = 1.
Binomial coefficients
The notation 
  (read “ n  choose k ”) denotes the number of k -combinations
of an n -set. Equation (C.2) gives
This formula is symmetric in k  and n  − k :
These numbers are also known as binomial coef ficients , due to their
appearance in the binomial theorem :
where n  ∈  ℕ  and x , y  ∈  ℝ . The right-hand side of equation (C.4) is called
the binomial expansion  of the left-hand side. A special case of the binomial
theorem occurs when x  = y  = 1:
This formula corresponds to counting the 2n binary n -strings by the number
of 1s they contain: 
  binary n -strings contain exactly k  1s, since there are 
 ways to choose k  out of the n  positions in which to place the 1s.
Many identities involve binomial coef ficients. The exercises at the end
of this section give you the opportunity to prove a few .
Binomial bounds
Page number: 1379
Y ou sometimes need to bound the size of a binomial coef ficient. For 1 ≤ k  ≤
n , we have the lower bound
T aking advantage of the inequality k ! ≥ ( k / e )k derived from Stirling’ s
approximation (3.25) on page 67, we obtain the upper bounds
For all integers k  such that 0 ≤ k  ≤ n , you can use induction (see Exercise
C.1-12) to prove the bound
where for convenience we assume that 00 = 1. For k  = λn , where 0 ≤ λ  ≤ 1,
we can rewrite this bound as
where
is the (binary) entropy function  and where, for convenience, we assume
that 0 lg 0 = 0, so that H (0) = H (1) = 0.
Exer cises
Page number: 1380
C.1-1
How many k -substrings does an n -string have? (Consider identical k -
substrings at dif ferent positions to be dif ferent.) How many substrings does
an n -string have in total?
C.1-2
An n -input, m -output boolean function  is a function from {0, 1}n to {0,
1}m. How many n -input, 1-output boolean functions are there? How many
n -input, m -output boolean functions are there?
C.1-3
In how many ways can n  professors sit around a circular conference table?
Consider two seatings to be the same if one can be rotated to form the other .
C.1-4
In how many ways is it possible to choose three distinct numbers from the
set {1, 2, … , 99} so that their sum is even?
C.1-5
Prove the identity
for 0 < k  ≤ n .
C.1-6
Prove the identity
for 0 ≤ k  < n .
C.1-7
T o choose k  objects from n , you can make one of the objects distinguished
and consider whether the distinguished object is chosen. Use this approach
to prove that
Page number: 1381
C.1-8
Using the result of Exercise C.1-7, make a table for n  = 0, 1, … , 6 and 0 ≤
k  ≤ n  of the binomial coef ficients 
  with 
  at the top, 
  and 
  on the next
line, then 
 , 
 , and 
 , and so forth. Such a table of binomial coef ficients is
called Pascal’ s triangle .
C.1-9
Prove that
C.1-10
Show that for any integers n  ≥ 0 and 0 ≤ k  ≤ n , the expression 
  achieves
its maximum value when k  = ⌊ n /2 ⌋  or k  = ⌈ n /2 ⌉ .
★  C.1-1 1
Ar gue that for any integers n  ≥ 0, j  ≥ 0, k  ≥ 0, and j  + k  ≤ n ,
Provide both an algebraic proof and an ar gument based on a method for
choosing j  + k  items out of n . Give an example in which equality does not
hold.
★  C.1-12
Use induction on all integers k  such that 0 ≤ k  ≤ n /2 to prove inequality
(C.7), and use equation (C.3) to extend it to all integers k  such that 0 ≤ k  ≤
n .
★  C.1-13
Use Stirling’ s approximation to prove that
Page number: 1382
★  C.1-14
By dif ferentiating the entropy function H ( λ ), show that it achieves its
maximum value at λ  = 1/2. What is H (1/2)?
★  C.1-15
Show that for any integer n  ≥ 0,
★  C.1-16
Inequality (C.5) provides a lower bound on the binomial coef ficient 
 . For
small values of k , a stronger bound holds. Prove that
for 
 .
C.2 Pr obability
Probability is an essential tool for the design and analysis of probabilistic
and randomized algorithms. This section reviews basic probability theory .
W e define probability in terms of a sample space  S , which is a set whose
elements are called outcomes  or elementary events . Think of each outcome
as a possible result of an experiment. For the experiment of flipping two
distinguishable coins, with each individual flip resulting in a head ( H ) or a
tail ( T ), you can view the sample space S  as consisting of the set of all
possible 2-strings over { H , T }:
S  = { HH , HT , TH , TT }.
An event  is a subset1 of the sample space S . For example, in the
experiment of flipping two coins, the event of obtaining one head and one
tail is { HT , TH }. The event S  is called the certain event , and the event ∅  is
Page number: 1383
called the null event . W e say that two events A  and B  are mutually
exclusive  if A  ∩ B  = ∅ . An outcome s  also defines the event { s }, which we
sometimes write as just s . By definition, all outcomes are mutually
exclusive.
Axioms of pr obability
A probability distribution  Pr {} on a sample space S  is a mapping from
events of S  to real numbers satisfying the following probability axioms :
1 . Pr { A } ≥ 0 for any event A .
2 . Pr { S } = 1.
3 . Pr { A  ∪  B } = Pr { A } + Pr { B } for any two mutually exclusive
events A  and B . More generally , for any sequence of events A1 , A2 ,
… (finite or countably infinite) that are pairwise mutually exclusive,
W e call Pr { A } the probability  of the event A . Axiom 2 is simply a
normalization requirement: there is really nothing fundamental about
choosing 1 as the probability of the certain event, except that it is natural
and convenient.
Several results follow immediately from these axioms and basic set
theory (see Section B.1 ). The null event ∅  has probability Pr { ∅ } = 0. If A
⊆  B , then Pr { A } ≤ Pr { B }. Using Ā  to denote the event S  − A  (the
complement  of A ), we have Pr { Ā } = 1 − Pr { A }. For any two events A  and
B ,
In our coin-flipping example, suppose that each of the four outcomes
has probability 1/4. Then the probability of getting at least one head is
Pr { HH , HT , TH } = Pr { HH } + Pr { HT } + Pr { TH }
= 3/4.
Another way to obtain the same result is to observe that since the
probability of getting strictly less than one head is Pr { TT } = 1/4, the
probability of getting at least one head is 1 − 1/4 = 3/4.
Page number: 1384
Discr ete pr obability distributions
A probability distribution is discrete  if it is defined over a finite or
countably infinite sample space. Let S  be the sample space. Then for any
event A ,
since outcomes, specifically those in A , are mutually exclusive. If S  is finite
and every outcome s  ∈  S  has probability Pr { s } = 1/| S |, then we have the
uniform probability distribution  on S . In such a case the experiment is
often described as “picking an element of S  at random.”
As an example, consider the process of flipping a fair coin , one for
which the probability of obtaining a head is the same as the probability of
obtaining a tail, that is, 1/2. Flipping the coin n  times gives the uniform
probability distribution defined on the sample space S  = { H , T }n, a set of
size 2n. W e can represent each outcome in S  as a string of length n  over { H ,
T }, with each string occurring with probability 1/2n. The event A  = {exactly
k  heads and exactly n  − k  tails occur} is a subset of S  of size 
 , since 
 strings of length n  over { H , T } contain exactly k H ’ s. The probability of
event A  is thus 
 .
Continuous uniform pr obability distribution
The continuous uniform probability distribution is an example of a
probability distribution in which not all subsets of the sample space are
considered to be events. The continuous uniform probability distribution is
defined over a closed interval [ a , b ] of the reals, where a  < b . The intuition
is that each point in the interval [ a , b ] should be “equally likely .” Because
there are an uncountable number of points, however , if all points had the
same finite, positive probability , axioms 2 and 3 would not be
simultaneously satisfied. For this reason, we’d like to associate a
probability only with some  of the subsets of S  in such a way that the axioms
are satisfied for these events.
For any closed interval [ c , d ], where a  ≤ c  ≤ d  ≤ b , the continuous
uniform probability distribution  defines the probability of the event [ c , d ]
to be

Page number: 1385
Letting c  = d  gives that the probability of a single point is 0. Removing the
endpoints [ c , c ] and [ d , d ] of an interval [ c , d ] results in the open interval ( c ,
d ). Since [ c , d ] = [ c , c ] ∪  ( c , d ) ∪  [ d , d ], axiom 3 gives Pr {[ c , d ]} = Pr {( c ,
d )}. Generally , the set of events for the continuous uniform probability
distribution contains any subset of the sample space [ a , b ] that can be
obtained by a finite or countable union of open and closed intervals, as well
as certain more complicated sets.
Conditional pr obability and independence
Sometimes you have some prior partial knowledge about the outcome of an
experiment. For example, suppose that a friend has flipped two fair coins
and has told you that at least one of the coins showed a head. What is the
probability that both coins are heads? The information given eliminates the
possibility of two tails. The three remaining outcomes are equally likely ,
and so you infer that each occurs with probability 1/3. Since only one of
these outcomes shows two heads, the answer is 1/3.
Conditional probability formalizes the notion of having prior partial
knowledge of the outcome of an experiment. The conditional probability  of
an event A  given that another event B  occurs is defined to be
whenever Pr { B } ≠ 0. (Read “Pr { A  | B }” as “the probability of A  given B .”)
The idea behind equation (C.16) is that since we are given that event B
occurs, the event that A  also occurs is A  ∩ B . That is, A  ∩ B  is the set of
outcomes in which both A  and B  occur . Because the outcome is one of the
elementary events in B , we normalize the probabilities of all the elementary
events in B  by dividing them by Pr { B }, so that they sum to 1. The
conditional probability of A  given B  is, therefore, the ratio of the probability
of event A  ∩ B  to the probability of event B . In the example above, A  is the
event that both coins are heads, and B  is the event that at least one coin is a
head. Thus, Pr { A  | B } = (1/4)/(3/4) = 1/3.
T wo events are independent  if
which is equivalent, if Pr { B } ≠ 0, to the condition
Pr { A  | B } = Pr { A }.
Page number: 1386
For example, suppose that you flip two fair coins and that the outcomes are
independent. Then the probability of two heads is (1/2)(1/2) = 1/4. Now
suppose that one event is that the first coin comes up heads and the other
event is that the coins come up dif ferently . Each of these events occurs with
probability 1/2, and the probability that both events occur is 1/4. Thus,
according to the definition of independence, the events are independent—
even though you might think that both events depend on the first coin.
Finally , suppose that the coins are welded together so that they both fall
heads or both fall tails and that the two possibilities are equally likely . Then
the probability that each coin comes up heads is 1/2, but the probability that
they both come up heads is 1/2 ≠ (1/2)(1/2). Consequently , the event that
one comes up heads and the event that the other comes up heads are not
independent.
A collection A1 , A2 , … , An  of events is said to be pairwise independent
if
Pr { Ai  ∩ Aj  } = Pr { Ai } Pr { Aj }
for all 1 ≤ i  < j  ≤ n . W e say that the events of the collection are (mutually)
independent  if every k -subset 
  of the collection, where 2 ≤ k  ≤ n
and 1 ≤ i1  < i2  < ⋯  < ik  ≤ n , satisfies
For example, suppose that you flip two fair coins. Let A1  be the event that
the first coin is heads, let A2  be the event that the second coin is heads, and
let A3  be the event that the two coins are dif ferent. Then,
Pr { A 1 } = 1/2,
Pr { A 2 } = 1/2,
Pr { A 3 } = 1/2,
Pr { A 1  ∩ A 2 } = 1/4,
Pr { A 1  ∩ A 3 } = 1/4,
Pr { A 2  ∩ A 3 } = 1/4,
Pr { A 1  ∩ A 2  ∩ A 3 } = 0.
Since for 1 ≤ i  < j  ≤ 3, we have Pr { Ai  ∩ Aj  } = Pr { Ai } Pr { Aj } = 1/4, the
events A1 , A2 , and A3  are pairwise independent. The events are not mutually
Page number: 1387
independent, however , because Pr { A1  ∩ A2  ∩ A3 } = 0 and Pr { A1 } Pr { A2 }
Pr { A3 } = 1/8 ≠ 0.
Bayes’ s theor em
From the definition (C.16) of conditional probability and the commutative
law A  ∩ B  = B  ∩ A , it follows that for two events A  and B , each with
nonzero probability ,
Solving for Pr { A  | B }, we obtain
which is known as Bayes’ s theorem . The denominator Pr { B } is a
normalizing constant, which we can reformulate as follows. Since B  = ( B  ∩
A ) ∪  ( B  ∩ Ā ), and since B  ∩ A  and B  ∩ Ā  are mutually exclusive events,
Pr { B } = Pr { B  ∩ A } + Pr { B  ∩ Ā }
= Pr { A } Pr { B  | A } + Pr { Ā } Pr { B  | Ā }.
Substituting into equation (C.19) produces an equivalent form of Bayes’ s
theorem:
Bayes’ s theorem can simplify the computing of conditional probabilities.
For example, suppose that you have a fair coin and a biased coin that
always comes up heads. Run an experiment consisting of three independent
events: choose one of the two coins at random, flip that coin once, and then
flip it again. Suppose that the coin you have chosen comes up heads both
times. What is the probability that it’ s the biased coin?
Bayes’ s theorem solves this problem. Let A  be the event that you choose
the biased coin, and let B  be the event that the chosen coin comes up heads
both times. W e wish to determine Pr { A  | B }, knowing that Pr { A } = 1/2, Pr
{ B  | A } = 1, Pr { Ā } = 1/2, and Pr { B  | Ā  = 1/4. Thus we have
Page number: 1388
Exer cises
C.2-1
Professor Rosencrantz flips a fair coin twice. Professor Guildenstern flips a
fair coin once. What is the probability that Professor Rosencrantz obtains
strictly more heads than Professor Guildenstern?
C.2-2
Prove Boole’ s inequality : For any finite or countably infinite sequence of
events A1 , A2 , …,
C.2-3
Y ou shuf fle a deck of 10 cards, each bearing a distinct number from 1 to 10,
in order to mix the cards thoroughly . Y ou then remove three cards, one at a
time, from the deck. What is the probability that the three cards you select
are in sorted (increasing) order?
C.2-4
Prove that
Pr { A  | B } + Pr { Ā  | B } = 1.
C.2-5
Prove that for any collection of events A1 , A2 , … , An ,
★  C.2-6
Show how to construct a set of n  events that are pairwise independent but
such that no subset of k  > 2 of them is mutually independent.
Page number: 1389
★  C.2-7
T wo events A  and B  are conditionally independent , given C , if
Pr { A  ∩ B  | C } = Pr { A  | C } · Pr { B  | C }.
Give a simple but nontrivial example of two events that are not independent
but are conditionally independent given a third event.
★  C.2-8
Professor Gore teaches a music class on rhythm in which three students—
Jef f, T im, and Carmine—are in danger of failing. Professor Gore tells the
three that one of them will pass the course and the other two will fail.
Carmine asks Professor Gore privately which of Jef f and T im will fail,
ar guing that since he already knows at least one of them will fail, the
professor won’ t be revealing any information about Carmine’ s outcome. In
a breach of privacy law , Professor Gore tells Carmine that Jef f will fail.
Carmine feels somewhat relieved now , figuring that either he or T im will
pass, so that his probability of passing is now 1/2. Is Carmine correct, or is
his chance of passing still 1/3? Explain.
C.3 Discr ete random variables
A (discrete) random variable  X  is a function from a finite or countably
infinite sample space S  to the real numbers. It associates a real number with
each possible outcome of an experiment, which allows us to work with the
probability distribution induced on the resulting set of numbers. Random
variables can also be defined for uncountably infinite sample spaces, but
they raise technical issues that are unnecessary to address for our purposes.
Therefore we’ll assume that random variables are discrete.
For a random variable X  and a real number x , we define the event X  = x
to be { s  ∈  S  : X ( s ) = x }, and thus
The function
f ( x ) = Pr { X  = x }
Page number: 1390
is the probability density function  of the random variable X . From the
probability axioms, Pr { X  = x } ≥ 0 and ∑x  Pr { X  = x } = 1.
As an example, consider the experiment of rolling a pair of ordinary , 6-
sided dice. There are 36 possible outcomes in the sample space. Assume
that the probability distribution is uniform, so that each outcome s  ∈  S  is
equally likely: Pr { s } = 1/36. Define the random variable X  to be the
maximum  of the two values showing on the dice. W e have Pr { X  = 3} =
5/36, since X  assigns a value of 3 to 5 of the 36 possible outcomes, namely ,
(1, 3), (2, 3), (3, 3), (3, 2), and (3, 1).
W e can define several random variables on the same sample space. If X
and Y  are random variables, the function
f ( x , y ) = Pr { X  = x  and Y  = y }
is the joint probability density function  of X  and Y . For a fixed value y ,
and similarly , for a fixed value x ,
Using the definition (C.16) of conditional probability on page 1 187, we
have
W e define two random variables X  and Y  to be independent  if for all x  and
y , the events X  = x  and Y  = y  are independent or , equivalently , if for all x
and y , we have Pr { X  = x  and Y  = y } = Pr { X  = x } Pr { Y  = y }.
Given a set of random variables defined over the same sample space, we
can define new random variables as sums, products, or other functions of
the original variables.
Expected value of a random variable
The simplest, and often the most useful, summary of the distribution of a
random variable is the “average” of the values it takes on. The expected
value  (or , synonymously , expectation  or mean ) of a discrete random
variable X  is
Page number: 1391
which is well defined if the sum is finite or conver ges absolutely .
Sometimes the expectation of X  is denoted by μX  or , when the random
variable is apparent from context, simply by μ .
Consider a game in which you flip two fair coins. Y ou earn $3 for each
head but lose $2 for each tail. The expected value of the random variable X
representing your earnings is
E[ X ] = 6 · Pr {2 H ’ s} + 1 · Pr {1 H , 1 T } − 4 · Pr {2 T ’ s}
= 6 · (1/4) + 1 · (1/2) − 4 · (1/4)
= 1.
Linearity of expectation  says that the expectation of the sum of two
random variables is the sum of their expectations, that is,
whenever E[ X ] and E[ Y ] are defined. Linearity of expectation applies to a
broad range of situations, holding even when X  and Y  are not independent.
It also extends to finite and absolutely conver gent summations of
expectations. Linearity of expectation is the key property that enables us to
perform probabilistic analyses by using indicator random variables (see
Section 5.2 ).
If X  is any random variable, any function g ( x ) defines a new random
variable g ( X ). If the expectation of g ( X ) is defined, then
Letting g ( x ) = ax , we have for any constant a ,
Consequently , expectations are linear: for any two random variables X  and
Y  and any constant a ,
When two random variables X  and Y  are independent and each has a
defined expectation,
Page number: 1392
In general, when n  random variables X1 , X2 , … , Xn  are mutually
independent,
When a random variable X  takes on values from the set of natural numbers
ℕ  = {0, 1, 2, …}, we have a nice formula for its expectation:
since each term Pr { X  ≥ i } is added in i  times and subtracted out i  − 1 times
(except Pr { X  ≥ 0}, which is added in 0 times and not subtracted out at all).
A function f ( x ) is convex  if
for all x  and y  and for all 0 ≤ λ  ≤ 1. Jensen’ s inequality  says that when a
convex function f ( x ) is applied to a random variable X ,
provided that the expectations exist and are finite.
V ariance and standard deviation
The expected value of a random variable does not express how “spread out”
the variable’ s values are. For example, consider random variables X  and Y
for which Pr { X  = 1/4} = Pr { X  = 3/4} = 1/2 and Pr { Y  = 0} = Pr { Y  = 1} =
1/2. Then both E[ X ] and E[ Y ] are 1/2, yet the actual values taken on by Y
are further from the mean than the actual values taken on by X .
Page number: 1393
The notion of variance mathematically expresses how far from the mean
a random variable’ s values are likely to be. The variance  of a random
variable X  with mean E[ X ] is
T o justify the equation E[E2[ X ]] = E2[ X ], note that because E[ X ] is a real
number and not a random variable, so is E2[ X ]. The equation E[ X E[ X ]] =
E2[ X ] follows from equation (C.25), with a  = E[ X ]. Rewriting equation
(C.31) yields an expression for the expectation of the square of a random
variable:
The variance of a random variable X  and the variance of aX  are related
(see Exercise C.3-10):
V ar[ aX ] = a2V ar[ X ].
When X  and Y  are independent random variables,
V ar[ X  + Y ] = V ar[ X ] + V ar[ Y ].
In general, if n  random variables X1 , X2 , … , Xn  are pairwise independent,
then
The standard deviation  of a random variable X  is the nonnegative square
root of the variance of X . The standard deviation of a random variable X  is
sometimes denoted σX  or simply σ  when the random variable X  is
understood from context. W ith this notation, the variance of X  is denoted σ2.
Exer cises
C.3-1
Page number: 1394
Y ou roll two ordinary , 6-sided dice. What is the expectation of the sum of
the two values showing? What is the expectation of the maximum of the
two values showing?
C.3-2
An array A [1 : n ] contains n  distinct numbers that are randomly ordered,
with each permutation of the n  numbers being equally likely . What is the
expectation of the index of the maximum element in the array? What is the
expectation of the index of the minimum element in the array?
C.3-3
A carnival game consists of three dice in a cage. A player can bet a dollar
on any of the numbers 1 through 6. The cage is shaken, and the payof f is as
follows. If the player ’ s number doesn’ t appear on any of the dice, the player
loses the dollar . Otherwise, if the player ’ s number appears on exactly k  of
the three dice, for k  = 1, 2, 3, the player keeps the dollar and wins k  more
dollars. What is the expected gain from playing the carnival game once?
C.3-4
Ar gue that if X  and Y  are nonnegative random variables, then
E[max { X , Y }] ≤ E[ X ] + E[ Y ].
★  C.3-5
Let X  and Y  be independent random variables. Prove that f ( X ) and g ( Y ) are
independent for any choice of functions f  and g .
★  C.3-6
Let X  be a nonnegative random variable, and suppose that E[ X ] is well
defined. Prove Markov’ s inequality :
for all t  > 0.
★  C.3-7
Let S  be a sample space, and let X  and X ′ be random variables such that X ( s )
≥ X ′( s ) for all s  ∈  S . Prove that for any real constant t ,
Page number: 1395
Pr { X  ≥ t } ≥ Pr { X ′ ≥ t }.
C.3-8
Which is lar ger: the expectation of the square of a random variable, or the
square of its expectation?
C.3-9
Show that for any random variable X  that takes on only the values 0 and 1,
we have V ar[ X ] = E[ X ] E [1 − X ].
C.3-10
Prove that V ar[ aX ] = a2V ar[ X ] from the definition (C.31) of variance.
C.4 The geometric and binomial distributions
A Bernoulli trial  is an experiment with only two possible outcomes:
success , which occurs with probability p , and failure , which occurs with
probability q  = 1 − p . A coin flip serves as an example where, depending on
your point of view , heads equates to success and tails to failure. When we
speak of Bernoulli trials  collectively , we mean that the trials are mutually
independent and, unless we specifically say otherwise, that each has the
same probability p  for success. T wo important distributions arise from
Bernoulli trials: the geometric distribution and the binomial distribution.
The geometric distribution
Consider a sequence of Bernoulli trials, each with a probability p  of success
and a probability q  = 1 − p  of failure. How many trials occur before a
success? Define the random variable X  to be the number of trials needed to
obtain a success. Then X  has values in the range {1, 2, …}, and for k  ≥ 1,
Page number: 1396
Figur e C.1  A geometric distribution with probability p  = 1/3 of success and a probability q  = 1 − p  of
failure. The expectation of the distribution is 1/ p  = 3.
since k  − 1 failures occur before the first success. A probability distribution
satisfying equation (C.35) is said to be a geometric distribution . Figure C.1
illustrates such a distribution.
Assuming that q  < 1, we can calculate the expectation of a geometric
distribution:
Thus, on average, it takes 1/ p  trials before a success occurs, an intuitive
result. As Exercise C.4-3 asks you to show , the variance is

Page number: 1397
As an example, suppose that you repeatedly roll two dice until you
obtain either a seven or an eleven. Of the 36 possible outcomes, 6 yield a
seven and 2 yield an eleven. Thus, the probability of success is p  = 8/36 =
2/9, and you’d have to roll 1/ p  = 9/2 = 4.5 times on average to obtain a
seven or eleven.
The binomial distribution
How many successes occur during n  Bernoulli trials, where a success
occurs with probability p  and a failure with probability q  = 1 − p ? Define
the random variable X  to be the number of successes in n  trials. Then X  has
values in the range {0, 1, … , n }, and for k  = 0, 1, … , n ,
since there are 
  ways to pick which k  of the n  trials are successes, and the
probability that each occurs is pkqn − k. A probability distribution satisfying
equation (C.38) is said to be a binomial distribution . For convenience, we
define the family of binomial distributions using the notation
Figure C.2  illustrates a binomial distribution. The name “binomial” comes
from the right-hand side of equation (C.38) being the k th term of the
expansion of ( p  + q )n. Consequently , since p  + q  = 1, equation (C.4) on page
1 181 gives
as axiom 2 of the probability axioms requires.
W e can compute the expectation of a random variable having a binomial
distribution from equations (C.9) and (C.40). Let X  be a random variable
that follows the binomial distribution b ( k ; n , p ), and let q  = 1 − p . The
definition of expectation gives
Page number: 1398
Figur e C.2  The binomial distribution b ( k ; 15, 1/3) resulting from n  = 15 Bernoulli trials, each with
probability p  = 1/3 of success. The expectation of the distribution is np  = 5.
Linearity of expectation produces the same result with substantially less
algebra. Let Xi  be the random variable describing the number of successes
in the i th trial. Then E[ Xi ] = p  · 1 + q  · 0 = p , and the expected number of
successes for n  trials is
Page number: 1399
W e can use the same approach to calculate the variance of the
distribution. By equation (C.31), 
 . Since Xi  takes on only
the values 0 and 1, we have 
 , which implies 
 . Hence,
T o compute the variance of X , we take advantage of the independence of the
n  trials. By equation (C.33), we have
As Figure C.2  shows, the binomial distribution b ( k ; n , p ) increases with
k  until it reaches the mean np , and then it decreases. T o prove that the
distribution always behaves in this manner , examine the ratio of successive
terms:

Page number: 1400
This ratio is greater than 1 precisely when ( n  + 1) p  − k  is positive.
Consequently , b ( k ; n , p ) > b ( k  − 1; n , p ) for k  < ( n  + 1) p  (the distribution
increases), and b ( k ; n , p ) < b ( k  − 1; n , p ) for k  > ( n  + 1) p  (the distribution
decreases). If ( n  + 1) p  is an integer , then for k  = ( n  + 1) p , the ratio b ( k ; n ,
p )/ b ( k  − 1; n , p ) equals 1, so that b ( k ; n , p ) = b ( k  − 1; n , p ). In this case, the
distribution has two maxima: at k  = ( n +1) p  and at k −1 = ( n +1) p −1 = np − q .
Otherwise, it attains a maximum at the unique integer k  that lies in the range
np  − q  < k  < ( n  + 1) p .
The following lemma provides an upper bound on the binomial
distribution.
Lemma C.1
Let n  ≥ 0, let 0 < p  < 1, let q  = 1 − p , and let 0 ≤ k  ≤ n . Then
Proof    W e have
▪
Exer cises
C.4-1
V erify axiom 2 of the probability axioms for the geometric distribution.
C.4-2
How many times on average do you need to flip six fair coins before
obtaining three heads and three tails?
C.4-3
Show that the variance of the geometric distribution is q / p2. ( Hint:  Use
Exercise A.1-6 on page 1 144.)
Page number: 1401
C.4-4
Show that b ( k ; n , p ) = b ( n  − k ; n , q ), where q  = 1 − p .
C.4-5
Show that the value of the maximum of the binomial distribution b ( k ; n , p )
is approximately 
 , where q  = 1 − p .
★  C.4-6
Show that the probability of no successes in n  Bernoulli trials, each with
probability p  = 1/ n  of success, is approximately 1/ e . Show that the
probability of exactly one success is also approximately 1/ e .
★  C.4-7
Professor Rosencrantz flips a fair coin n  times, and so does Professor
Guildenstern. Show that the probability that they get the same number of
heads is 
 . ( Hint:  For Professor Rosencrantz, call a head a success, and
for Professor Guildenstern, call a tail a success.) Use your ar gument to
verify the identity
★  C.4-8
Show that for 0 ≤ k  ≤ n ,
b ( k ; n , 1/2) ≤ 2n H ( k / n )− n,
where H ( x ) is the entropy function (C.8) on page 1 182.
★  C.4-9
Consider n  Bernoulli trials, where for i  = 1, 2, … , n , the i th trial has
probability pi  of success, and let X  be the random variable denoting the total
number of successes. Let p  ≥ pi  for all i  = 1, 2, … , n . Prove that for 1 ≤ k  ≤
n ,

Page number: 1402
★  C.4-10
Let X  be the random variable for the total number of successes in a set A  of
n  Bernoulli trials, where the i th trial has a probability pi  of success, and let
X ′ be the random variable for the total number of successes in a second set
A ′ of n  Bernoulli trials, where the i th trial has a probability 
  of success.
Prove that for 0 ≤ k  ≤ n ,
Pr { X ′ ≥ k } ≥ Pr { X  ≥ k }.
( Hint:  Show how to obtain the Bernoulli trials in A ′ by an experiment
involving the trials of A , and use the result of Exercise C.3-7.)
★  C.5 The tails of the binomial distribution
The probability of having at least, or at most, k  successes in n  Bernoulli
trials, each with probability p  of success, is often of more interest than the
probability of having exactly k  successes. In this section, we investigate the
tails  of the binomial distribution: the two regions of the distribution b ( k ; n ,
p ) that are far from the mean np . W e’ll prove several important bounds on
(the sum of all terms in) a tail.
W e first provide a bound on the right tail of the distribution b ( k ; n , p ). T o
determine bounds on the left tail, simply invert the roles of successes and
failures.
Theorem C.2
Consider a sequence of n  Bernoulli trials, where success occurs with
probability p . Let X  be the random variable denoting the total number of
successes. Then for 0 ≤ k  ≤ n , the probability of at least k  successes is
Proof    For S  ⊆  {1, 2, … , n }, let AS  denote the event that the i th trial is a
success for every i  ∈  S . Since Pr { AS } = pk, where | S | = k , we have
Page number: 1403
▪
The following corollary restates the theorem for the left tail of the
binomial distribution. In general, we’ll leave it to you to adapt the proofs
from one tail to the other .
Corollary C.3
Consider a sequence of n  Bernoulli trials, where success occurs with
probability p . If X  is the random variable denoting the total number of
successes, then for 0 ≤ k  ≤ n , the probability of at most k  successes is
▪
Our next bound concerns the left tail of the binomial distribution. Its
corollary shows that, far from the mean, the left tail diminishes
exponentially .
Theorem C.4
Consider a sequence of n  Bernoulli trials, where success occurs with
probability p  and failure with probability q  = 1 − p . Let X  be the random
variable denoting the total number of successes. Then for 0 < k  < np , the
probability of fewer than k  successes is

Page number: 1404
Proof    W e bound the series 
  by a geometric series using the
technique from Section A.2 , page 1 147. For i  = 1, 2, … , k , equation (C.45)
gives
If we let
it follows that
b( i  − 1; n , p ) < xb ( i ; n , p )
for 0 < i  ≤ k . Iteratively applying this inequality k  − i  times gives
b ( i ; n , p ) < xk − i b ( k ; n , p )
for 0 ≤ i  < k , and hence
▪
Page number: 1405
Corollary C.5
Consider a sequence of n  Bernoulli trials, where success occurs with
probability p  and failure with probability q  = 1 − p . Then for 0 < k  ≤ np /2,
the probability of fewer than k  successes is less than half the probability of
fewer than k  + 1 successes.
Proof    Because k  ≤ np /2, we have
since q  ≤ 1. Letting X  be the random variable denoting the number of
successes, Theorem C.4 and inequality (C.46) imply that the probability of
fewer than k  successes is
Thus we have
since 
 .
▪
Bounds on the right tail follow similarly . Exercise C.5-2 asks you to
prove them.
Corollary C.6
Consider a sequence of n  Bernoulli trials, where success occurs with
probability p . Let X  be the random variable denoting the total number of
successes. Then for np  < k  < n , the probability of more than k  successes is

Page number: 1406
▪
Corollary C.7
Consider a sequence of n  Bernoulli trials, where success occurs with
probability p  and failure with probability q  = 1 − p . Then for ( np  + n )/2 < k
< n , the probability of more than k  successes is less than half the probability
of more than k  − 1 successes.
▪
The next theorem considers n  Bernoulli trials, each with a probability pi
of success, for i  = 1, 2, … , n . As the subsequent corollary shows, we can
use the theorem to provide a bound on the right tail of the binomial
distribution by setting pi  = p  for each trial.
Theorem C.8
Consider a sequence of n  Bernoulli trials, where in the i th trial, for i  = 1, 2,
… , n , success occurs with probability pi  and failure occurs with probability
qi  = 1 − pi . Let X  be the random variable describing the total number of
successes, and let μ  = E[ X ]. Then for r  > μ ,
Proof    Since for any α  > 0, the function eαx strictly increases in x ,
where we will determine α  later . Using Markov’ s inequality (C.34), we
obtain
The bulk of the proof consists of bounding E[ eα ( X − μ )] and substituting a
suitable value for α  in inequality (C.48). First, we evaluate E[ eα ( X − μ )]. Using
the technique of indicator random variables (see Section 5.2 ), let Xi  = I {the
i th Bernoulli trial is a success} for i  = 1, 2, … , n . That is, Xi  is the random
variable that is 1 if the i th Bernoulli trial is a success and 0 if it is a failure.
Thus, we have

Page number: 1407
and by linearity of expectation,
which implies
T o evaluate E[ eα ( X − μ )], we substitute for X  − μ , obtaining
which follows from equation (C.27), since the mutual independence of the
random variables Xi  implies the mutual independence of the random
variables 
  (see Exercise C.3-5). By the definition of expectation,
where exp( x ) denotes the exponential function: exp( x ) = ex. (Inequality
(C.49) follows from the inequalities α  > 0, qi  ≤ 1, 
 , and 
 . The
last line follows from inequality (3.14) on page 66.) Consequently ,
since 
 . Therefore, from equation (C.47) and inequalities (C.48)
and (C.50), it follows that

Page number: 1408
Choosing α  = ln( r / μ ) (see Exercise C.5-7), we obtain
▪
When applied to Bernoulli trials in which each trial has the same
probability of success, Theorem C.8 yields the following corollary
bounding the right tail of a binomial distribution.
Corollary C.9
Consider a sequence of n  Bernoulli trials, where in each trial success occurs
with probability p  and failure occurs with probability q  = 1 − p . Then for r
> np ,
Proof    By equation (C.41), we have μ  = E[ X ] = np .
▪
Exer cises
★  C.5-1
Which is more likely: getting exactly n  heads in 2 n  flips of a fair coin, or n
heads in n  flips of a fair coin?
★  C.5-2
Prove Corollaries C.6 and C.7.
★  C.5-3
Show that

Page number: 1409
for all a  > 0 and all k  such that 0 < k  < na /( a  + 1).
★  C.5-4
Prove that if 0 < k  < np , where 0 < p  < 1 and q  = 1 − p , then
★  C.5-5
Use Theorem C.8 to show that
for r  > n  − μ . Similarly , use Corollary C.9 to show that
for r  > n  − np .
★  C.5-6
Consider a sequence of n  Bernoulli trials, where in the i th trial, for i  = 1, 2,
… , n , success occurs with probability pi  and failure occurs with probability
qi  = 1 − pi . Let X  be the random variable describing the total number of
successes, and let μ  = E[ X ]. Show that for r  ≥ 0,
( Hint:  Prove that 
 . Then follow the outline of the proof of
Theorem C.8, using this inequality in place of inequality (C.49).)
★  C.5-7
Show that choosing α  = ln( r / μ ) minimizes the right-hand side of inequality
(C.51).
Pr oblems
C-1 The Monty Hall problem
Page number: 1410
Imagine that you are a contestant in the 1960s game show Let’ s Make a
Deal , hosted by emcee Monty Hall. A valuable prize is hidden behind one
of three doors and comparatively worthless prizes behind the other two
doors. Y ou will win the valuable prize, typically an automobile or other
expensive product, if you select the correct door . After you have picked one
door , but before the door has been opened, Monty , who knows which door
hides the automobile, directs his assistant Carol Merrill to open one of the
other doors, revealing a goat (not a valuable prize). He asks whether you
would like to stick with your current choice or to switch to the other closed
door . What should you do to maximize your chances of winning the
automobile and not the other goat?
The answer to this question—stick or switch?—has been heavily
debated, in part because the problem setup is ambiguous. W e’ll explore
dif ferent subtle assumptions.
a.  Suppose that your first pick is random, with probability 1/3 of choosing
the right door . Moreover , you know that Monty always gives every
contestant (and will give you) the opportunity to switch. Prove that it is
better to switch than stick. What is your probability of winning the
automobile?
This answer is the one typically given, even though the original
statement of the problem rarely mentions the assumption that Monty always
of fers the contestant the opportunity to switch. But, as the remainder of this
problem will elucidate, your best strategy may be dif ferent if this unstated
assumption does not hold. In fact, in the real game show , after a contestant
picked a door , Monty sometimes simply asked Carol to open the door that
the contestant had chosen.
Let’ s model the interactions between you and Monty as a probabilistic
experiment, where you both employ randomized strategies. Specifically ,
after you pick a door , Monty of fers you the opportunity to switch with
probability pright  if you picked the right door and with probability pwrong  if
you picked the wrong door . Given the opportunity to switch, you randomly
choose to switch with probability pswitch . For example, if Monty always
of fers you the opportunity to switch, then his strategy is given by pright  =
pwrong  = 1. If you always switch, then your strategy is given by pswitch  = 1.
The game can now be viewed as an experiment consisting of five steps:
Page number: 1411
1. Y ou pick a door at random, choosing the automobile (right) with
probability 1/3 or a goat (wrong) with probability 2/3.
2. Carol opens one of the two closed doors, revealing a goat.
3. Monty of fers you the opportunity to switch with probability pright  if your
choice is right and with probability pwrong  if your choice is wrong.
4. If Monty makes you an of fer in step 3, you switch with probability
pswitch .
5. Carol opens the door you’ve chosen, revealing either an automobile (you
win) or a goat (you lose).
Let’ s now analyze this game and understand how the choices of pright ,
pwrong , and pswitch  influence the probability of winning.
b.  What are the six outcomes in the sample space for this game? Which
outcomes correspond to you winning the automobile? What are the
probabilities in terms of pright , pwrong , and pswitch  of each outcome?
Or ganize your answers into a table.
c.  Use the results of your table (or other means) to prove that the probability
of winning the automobile is
Suppose that Monty knows the probability pswitch  that you switch, and his
goal is to minimize your chance of winning.
d.  If pswitch  > 0 (you switch with a positive probability), what is Monty’ s
best strategy , that is, his best choice for pright  and pwrong ?
e.  If pswitch  = 0 (you always stick), ar gue that all of Monty’ s possible
strategies are optimal for him.
Suppose that now Monty’ s strategy is fixed, with particular values for pright
and pwrong .
f.  If you know pright  and pwrong , what is your best strategy for choosing your
probability pswitch  of switching as a function of pright  and pwrong ?
Page number: 1412
g.  If you don’ t know pright  and pwrong , what choice of pswitch  maximizes the
minimum probability of winning over all the choices of pright  and pwrong ?
Let’ s return to the original problem as stated, where Monty has given
you the option of switching, but you have no knowledge of Monty’ s
possible motivations or strategies.
h.  Ar gue that the conditional probability of winning the automobile given
that Monty of fers you the opportunity to switch is
Explain why pright  + 2 pwrong  ≠ 0.
i.  What is the value of expression (C.52) when pswitch  = 1/2? Show that
choosing pswitch  < 1/2 or pswitch  > 1/2 allows Monty to select values for
pright  and pwrong  that yield a lower value for expression (C.52) than
choosing pswitch  = 1/2.
j.  Suppose that you don’ t know Monty’ s strategy . Explain why choosing to
switch with probability 1/2 is a good strategy for the original problem as
stated. Summarize what you have learned overall from this problem.
C-2 Balls and bins
This problem investigates the ef fect of various assumptions on the number
of ways of placing n  balls into b  distinct bins.
a.  Suppose that the n  balls are distinct and that their order within a bin does
not matter . Ar gue that the number of ways of placing the balls in the bins
is bn.
b.  Suppose that the balls are distinct and that the balls in each bin are
ordered. Prove that there are exactly ( b  + n  − 1)!/( b  − 1)! ways to place
the balls in the bins. ( Hint:  Consider the number of ways of arranging n
distinct balls and b  − 1 indistinguishable sticks in a row .)
c.  Suppose that the balls are identical, and hence their order within a bin
does not matter . Show that the number of ways of placing the balls in the
bins is 
 . ( Hint:  Of the arrangements in part (b), how many are
repeated if the balls are made identical?)
Page number: 1413
d.  Suppose that the balls are identical and that no bin may contain more
than one ball, so that n  ≤ b . Show that the number of ways of placing the
balls is 
 .
e.  Suppose that the balls are identical and that no bin may be left empty .
Assuming that n  ≥ b , show that the number of ways of placing the balls is 
.
Appendix notes
The first general methods for solving probability problems were discussed
in a famous correspondence between B. Pascal and P . de Fermat, which
began in 1654, and in a book by C. Huygens in 1657. Rigorous probability
theory began with the work of J. Bernoulli in 1713 and A. De Moivre in
1730. Further developments of the theory were provided by P .-S. Laplace,
S.-D. Poisson, and C. F . Gauss.
Sums of random variables were originally studied by P . L. Chebyshev
and A. A. Markov . A. N. Kolmogorov axiomatized probability theory in
1933. Chernof f [ 91 ] and Hoef fding [ 222 ] provided bounds on the tails of
distributions. Seminal work in random combinatorial structures was done
by P . Erd ő s.
Knuth [ 259 ] and Liu [ 302 ] are good references for elementary
combinatorics and counting. Standard textbooks such as Billingsley [ 56 ],
Chung [ 93 ], Drake [ 125 ], Feller [ 139 ], and Rozanov [ 390 ] of fer
comprehensive introductions to probability .
1 For a general probability distribution, there may be some subsets of the sample space S  that are not
considered to be events. This situation usually arises when the sample space is uncountably infinite.
The main requirement for what subsets are events is that the set of events of a sample space must be
closed under the operations of taking the complement of an event, forming the union of a finite or
countable number of events, and taking the intersection of a finite or countable number of events.
Most of the probability distributions we see in this book are over finite or countable sample spaces,
and we generally consider all subsets of a sample space to be events. A notable exception is the
continuous uniform probability distribution, which we’ll see shortly .
Page number: 1414
D Matrices
Matrices arise in numerous applications, including, but by no means limited
to, scientific computing. If you have seen matrices before, much of the
material in this appendix will be familiar to you, but some of it might be
new . Section D.1  covers basic matrix definitions and operations, and
Section D.2  presents some basic matrix properties.
D.1 Matrices and matrix operations
This section reviews some basic concepts of matrix theory and some
fundamental properties of matrices.
Matrices and vectors
A matrix  is a rectangular array of numbers. For example,
is a 2 × 3 matrix A  = ( aij ), where for i  = 1, 2 and j  = 1, 2, 3, the element of
the matrix in row i  and column j  is denoted by aij . By convention, uppercase
letters denote matrices and corresponding subscripted lowercase letters
denote their elements. W e denote the set of all m  × n  matrices with real-
valued entries by ℝm × n and, in general, the set of m  × n  matrices with
entries drawn from a set S  by Sm × n.
Page number: 1415
The transpose  of a matrix A  is the matrix AT obtained by exchanging the
rows and columns of A . For the matrix A  of equation (D.1),
A vector  is a one-dimensional array of numbers. For example,
is a vector of size 3. W e sometimes call a vector of length n  an n-vector . By
convention, lowercase letters denote vectors, and the i th element of a size- n
vector x  is denoted by xi , for i  = 1, 2, … , n . W e take the standard form of a
vector to be as a column vector  equivalent to an n  × 1 matrix, whereas the
corresponding row vector  is obtained by taking the transpose:
xT = ( 2 3 5 ).
The unit vector  ei  is the vector whose i th element is 1 and all of whose
other elements are 0. Usually , the context makes the size of a unit vector
clear .
A zero matrix  is a matrix all of whose entries are 0. Such a matrix is
often denoted 0, since the ambiguity between the number 0 and a matrix of
0s can usually be resolved from context. If a matrix of 0s is intended, then
the size of the matrix also needs to be derived from the context.
Squar e matrices
Square  n  × n  matrices arise frequently . Several special cases of square
matrices are of particular interest:
1. A diagonal matrix  has aij  = 0 whenever i  ≠ j . Because all of the of f-
diagonal elements are 0, a succinct way to specify the matrix lists only the
elements along the diagonal:

Page number: 1416
2. The n  × n  identity matrix  In  is a diagonal matrix with 1s along the
diagonal:
When I  appears without a subscript, its size derives from the context. The
i th column of an identity matrix is the unit vector ei .
3. A tridiagonal matrix  T  is one for which tij  = 0 if | i  − j  | > 1. Nonzero
entries appear only on the main diagonal, immediately above the main
diagonal ( ti,i +1  for i  = 1, 2, … , n  − 1), or immediately below the main
diagonal ( ti +1, i  for i  = 1, 2, … , n  − 1):
4. An upper-triangular matrix  U  is one for which uij  = 0 if i  > j . All entries
below the diagonal are 0:
An upper -triangular matrix is unit upper-triangular  if it has all 1s along
the diagonal.
5. A lower-triangular matrix  L  is one for which lij  = 0 if i  < j . All entries
above the diagonal are 0:

Page number: 1417
A lower -triangular matrix is unit lower-triangular  if it has all 1s along
the diagonal.
6. A permutation matrix  P  has exactly one 1 in each row or column, and 0s
elsewhere. An example of a permutation matrix is
Such a matrix is called a permutation matrix because multiplying a vector
x  by a permutation matrix has the ef fect of permuting (rearranging) the
elements of x . Exercise D.1-4 explores additional properties of
permutation matrices.
7. A symmetric matrix  A  satisfies the condition A  = AT. For example,
is a symmetric matrix.
Basic matrix operations
The elements of a matrix or vector are scalar numbers  from a number
system, such as the real numbers, the complex numbers, or integers modulo
a prime. The number system defines how to add and multiply scalars. These
definitions extend to encompass addition and multiplication of matrices.
W e define matrix addition  as follows. If A  = ( aij ) and B  = ( bij ) are m  × n
matrices, then their matrix sum C  = ( cij ) = A  + B  is the m  × n  matrix defined
by
cij  = aij  + bij
for i  = 1, 2, … , m  and j  = 1, 2, … , n . That is, matrix addition is performed
componentwise. A zero matrix is the identity for matrix addition:
A  + 0 = A  = 0 + A .
If is λ  a scalar number and A  = ( aij ) is a matrix, then λA  = ( λaij ) is the
scalar multiple  of A  obtained by multiplying each of its elements by λ . As a
Page number: 1418
special case, we define the negative  of a matrix A  = ( aij ) to be −1 · A  = − A ,
so that the ij th entry of − A  is − aij . Thus,
A  + (− A ) = 0 = (− A ) + A .
The negative of a matrix defines matrix subtraction : A  − B  = A  + (− B ).
W e define matrix multiplication  as follows. Start with two matrices A
and B  that are compatible  in the sense that the number of columns of A
equals the number of rows of B . (In general, an expression containing a
matrix product AB  is always assumed to imply that matrices A  and B  are
compatible.) If A  = ( aik ) is a p  × q  matrix and B  = ( bkj ) is a q  × r  matrix,
then their matrix product C  = AB  is the p  × r  matrix C  = ( cij ), where
for i  = 1, 2, … , m  and j  = 1, 2, … , p . The procedure R ECT ANGULAR -
M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y  on page 374 implements matrix multiplication in the
straightforward manner based on equation (D.2), assuming that C  is
initialized to 0, using pqr  multiplications and p ( q  − 1) r  additions for a
running time of Θ( pqr ). If the matrices are n × n  square matrices, so that n  =
p  = q  = r , the pseudocode reduces to M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y  on page 81, whose
running time is Θ( n3). ( Section 4.2  describes an asymptotically faster
Θ( nlg7)-time algorithm due to V . Strassen.)
Matrices have many (but not all) of the algebraic properties typical of
numbers. Identity matrices are identities for matrix multiplication:
Im A  = AIn  = A
for any m  × n  matrix A . Multiplying by a zero matrix gives a zero matrix:
A  · 0 = 0.
Matrix multiplication is associative:
A ( BC ) = ( AB ) C
for compatible matrices A , B , and C . Matrix multiplication distributes over
addition:
A ( B  + C ) = AB  + AC ,
( B  + C ) D = BD  + CD .
Page number: 1419
For n  > 1, multiplication of n  × n  matrices is not commutative. For
example, if 
  and 
 , then 
  and 
 .
W e define matrix-vector products or vector -vector products as if the
vector were the equivalent n  × 1 matrix (or a 1 × n  matrix, in the case of a
row vector). Thus, if A  is an m  × n  matrix and x  is an n -vector , then Ax  is an
m -vector . If x  and y  are n -vectors, then
is a scalar number (actually a 1 × 1 matrix) called the inner product  of x
and y . W e also use the notation 〈 x , y〉  to denote xTy . The inner -product
operator is commutative: 〈 x , y〉  = 〈 y , x〉 . The matrix xyT is an n  × n  matrix Z
called the outer product  of x  and y , where zij  = xi yj . The (euclidean) norm
∥ x ∥  of an n -vector x  is defined by
Thus, the norm of x  is its length in n -dimensional euclidean space. A useful
fact, which follows from the equality
is that for any real number a  and n -vector x ,
Exer cises
D.1-1
Show that if A  and B  are symmetric n  × n  matrices, then so are A  + B  and A
− B .
D.1-2
Prove that ( AB )T = BTAT and that ATA  is always a symmetric matrix.
D.1-3
Prove that the product of two lower -triangular matrices is lower -triangular .
Page number: 1420
D.1-4
Prove that if P  is an n  × n  permutation matrix and A  is an n  × n  matrix, then
the matrix product P A  is A  with its rows permuted, and the matrix product
AP  is A  with its columns permuted. Prove that the product of two
permutation matrices is a permutation matrix.
D.2 Basic matrix pr operties
W e now define some basic properties pertaining to matrices: inverses, linear
dependence and independence, rank, and determinants. W e also define the
class of positive-definite matrices.
Matrix inverses, ranks, and determinants
The inverse  of an n  × n  matrix A  is the n  × n  matrix, denoted A−1 (if it
exists), such that AA−1 = In  = A−1A . For example,
Many nonzero n  × n  matrices do not have inverses. A matrix without an
inverse is called noninvertible , or singular . An example of a nonzero
singular matrix is
If a matrix has an inverse, it is called invertible , or nonsingular . Matrix
inverses, when they exist, are unique. (See Exercise D.2-1.) If A  and B  are
nonsingular n  × n  matrices, then
( BA )−1 = A−1B−1.
The inverse operation commutes with the transpose operation:
( A−1)T = ( AT)−1.
The vectors x1 , x2 , … , xn  are linearly dependent  if there exist
coef ficients c1 , c2 , … , cn , not all of which are 0, such that c1 x1  + c2 x2  + ⋯
+ cn xn  = 0. The row vectors x1  = ( 1 2 3 ), x2  = ( 2 6 4 ), and x3  = ( 4 1 1 9 )
are linearly dependent, for example, since 2 x1 +3 x2 −2 x3  = 0. If vectors are
Page number: 1421
not linearly dependent, they are linearly independent . For example, the
columns of an identity matrix are linearly independent.
The column rank  of a nonzero m  × n  matrix A  is the size of the lar gest
set of linearly independent columns of A . Similarly , the row rank  of A  is the
size of the lar gest set of linearly independent rows of A . A fundamental
property of any matrix A  is that its row rank always equals its column rank,
so that we can simply refer to the rank  of A . The rank of an m  × n  matrix is
an integer between 0 and min { m , n }, inclusive. (The rank of a zero matrix
is 0, and the rank of an n  × n  identity matrix is n .) An alternate, but
equivalent and often more useful, definition is that the rank of a nonzero
m × n  matrix A  is the smallest number r  such that there exist matrices B  and
C  of respective sizes m  × r  and r  × n  such that A  = BC . A square n  × n
matrix has full rank  if its rank is n . An m  × n  matrix has full column rank
if its rank is n . The following theorem gives a fundamental property of
ranks.
Theorem D.1
A square matrix has full rank if and only if it is nonsingular .
▪
A null vector  for a matrix A  is a nonzero vector x  such that Ax  = 0. The
following theorem (whose proof is left as Exercise D.2-7) and its corollary
relate the notions of column rank and singularity to null vectors.
Theorem D.2
A matrix has full column rank if and only if it does not have a null vector .
▪
Corollary D.3
A square matrix is singular if and only if it has a null vector .
▪
The ij th minor  of an n × n  matrix A , for n  > 1, is the ( n −1)×( n −1) matrix
A[ ij ]  obtained by deleting the i th row and j th column of A . The determinant
of an n × n  matrix A  is defined recursively in terms of its minors by

Page number: 1422
The term (−1)i + j det( A[ ij ] ) is known as the cofactor  of the element aij .
The following theorems, whose proofs are omitted, express fundamental
properties of the determinant.
Theorem D.4 (Determinant properties)
The determinant of a square matrix A  has the following properties:
If any row or any column of A  is zero, then det( A ) = 0.
The determinant of A  is multiplied by λ  if the entries of any one row
(or any one column) of A  are all multiplied by λ .
The determinant of A  is unchanged if the entries in one row
(respectively , column) are added to those in another row
(respectively , column).
The determinant of A  equals the determinant of AT.
The determinant of A  is multiplied by −1 if any two rows (or any two
columns) are exchanged.
Also, for any square matrices A  and B , we have det( AB ) = det( A ) det( B ).
▪
Theorem D.5
An n  × n  matrix A  is singular if and only if det( A ) = 0.
▪
Positive-definite matrices
Positive-definite matrices play an important role in many applications. An n
× n  matrix A  is positive-definite  if xTAx  > 0 for all n -vectors x  ≠ 0. For
example, the identity matrix is positive-definite, since if x  = ( x1  x2  ⋯  xn )T
is a nonzero vector , then
Matrices that arise in applications are often positive-definite due to the
following theorem.
Page number: 1423
Theorem D.6
For any matrix A  with full column rank, the matrix ATA  is positive-definite.
Proof    W e must show that xT( ATA ) x  > 0 for any nonzero vector x . For any
vector x ,
xT( ATA ) x=( Ax )T( Ax )(by Exercise D.1-2)
=∥ Ax ∥2.
The value ∥ Ax ∥2 is just the sum of the squares of the elements of the vector
Ax . Therefore, ∥ Ax ∥2 ≥ 0. W e’ll show by contradiction that ∥ Ax ∥2 > 0.
Suppose that ∥ Ax ∥2 = 0. Then, every element of Ax  is 0, which is to say Ax
= 0. Since A  has full column rank, Theorem D.2 says that x  = 0, which
contradicts the requirement that x  is nonzero. Hence, ATA  is positive-
definite.
▪
Section 28.3  explores other properties of positive-definite matrices.
Section 33.3  uses a similar condition, known as positive-semidefinite. An n
× n  matrix A  is positive-semidefinite  if xTAx  ≥ 0 for all n -vectors x  ≠ 0.
Exer cises
D.2-1
Prove that matrix inverses are unique, that is, if B  and C  are inverses of A ,
then B  = C .
D.2-2
Prove that the determinant of a lower -triangular or upper -triangular matrix
is equal to the product of its diagonal elements. Prove that the inverse of a
lower -triangular matrix, if it exists, is lower -triangular .
D.2-3
Prove that if P  is a permutation matrix, then P  is invertible, its inverse is PT,
and PT is a permutation matrix.
D.2-4
Page number: 1424
Let A  and B  be n  × n  matrices such that AB  = I . Prove that if A ′ is obtained
from A  by adding row j  into row i , where i  ≠ j , then subtracting column i
from column j  of B  yields the inverse B ′ of A ′.
D.2-5
Let A  be a nonsingular n  × n  matrix with complex entries. Show that every
entry of A−1 is real if and only if every entry of A  is real.
D.2-6
Show that if A  is a nonsingular , symmetric, n  × n  matrix, then A−1 is
symmetric. Show that if B  is an arbitrary m  × n  matrix, then the m  × m
matrix given by the product BABT is symmetric.
D.2-7
Prove Theorem D.2. That is, show that a matrix A  has full column rank if
and only if Ax  = 0 implies x  = 0. ( Hint:  Express the linear dependence of
one column on the others as a matrix-vector equation.)
D.2-8
Prove that for any two compatible matrices A  and B ,
rank( AB ) ≤ min {rank( A ), rank( B )},
where equality holds if either A  or B  is a nonsingular square matrix. ( Hint:
Use the alternate definition of the rank of a matrix.)
Pr oblems
D-1 V andermonde matrix
Given numbers x0 , x1 , … , xn −1 , prove that the determinant of the
V andermonde matrix
is
Page number: 1425
( Hint:  Multiply column i  by − x0  and add it to column i  + 1 for i  = n  − 1, n  −
2, … , 1, and then use induction.)
D-2 Permutations defined by matrix-vector multiplication over GF .( 2 )
One class of permutations of the integers in the set Sn  = {0, 1, 2, … , 2n −
1} is defined by matrix multiplication over GF (2), the Galois field of two
elements. For each integer x  ∈  Sn , we view its binary representation as an
n -bit vector
where 
 . If A  is an n  × n  matrix in which each entry is either 0 or
1, then we can define a permutation mapping each value x  ∈  Sn  to the
number whose binary representation is the matrix-vector product Ax . All
this arithmetic is performed over GF (2) : all values are either 0 or 1, and
with one exception, the usual rules of addition and multiplication apply . The
exception is that 1 + 1 = 0. Y ou can think of arithmetic over GF (2) as being
just like regular integer arithmetic, except that you use only the least-
significant bit.
As an example, for S2  = {0, 1, 2, 3}, the matrix
defines the following permutation πA : πA (0) = 0, πA (1) = 3, πA (2) = 2, πA (3)
= 1. T o see why πA (3) = 1, observe that, working in GF (2),

Page number: 1426
which is the binary representation of 1.
For the remainder of this problem, we’ll work over GF (2), and all
matrix and vector entries will be 0 or 1. Define the rank  of a 0-1 matrix (a
matrix for which each entry is either 0 or 1) over GF (2) the same as for a
regular matrix, but with all arithmetic that determines linear independence
performed over GF (2). W e define the range  of an n  × n  0-1 matrix A  by
R ( A ) = { y  : y  = Ax  for some x  ∈  Sn },
so that R ( A ) is the set of numbers in Sn  that are produced by multiplying
each value x  ∈  Sn  by A .
a.  If r  is the rank of matrix A , prove that | R ( A )| = 2r. Conclude that A  defines
a permutation on Sn  only if A  has full rank.
For a given n  × n  matrix A  and a given value y  ∈  R ( A ), we define the
preimage  of y  by
P  ( A , y ) = { x  : Ax  = y },
so that P ( A , y ) is the set of values in Sn  that map to y  when multiplied by A .
b.  If r  is the rank of n  × n  matrix A  and y  ∈  R ( A ), prove that | P ( A , y )| = 2n − r.
Let 0 ≤ m  ≤ n , and suppose that we partition the set Sn  into blocks of
consecutive numbers, where the i th block consists of the 2m numbers i 2m,
i 2m + 1, i 2m +2, … , ( i  +1)2m −1. For any subset S  ⊆  Sn , define B ( S , m ) to
be the set of size-2m blocks of Sn  containing some element of S . As an
example, when n  = 3, m  = 1, and S  = {1, 4, 5}, then B ( S , m ) consists of
blocks 0 (since 1 is in the 0th block) and 2 (since both 4 and 5 belong to
block 2).
c.  Let r  be the rank of the lower left ( n  − m ) × m  submatrix of A , that is, the
matrix formed by taking the intersection of the bottom n  − m  rows and the
leftmost m  columns of A . Let S  be any size-2m block of Sn , and let S ′ = { y
: y  = Ax  for some x  ∈  S }. Prove that | B ( S ′, m )| = 2r and that for each block
in B ( S ′, m ), exactly 2m − r numbers in S  map to that block.
Because multiplying the zero vector by any matrix yields a zero vector ,
the set of permutations of Sn  defined by multiplying by n  × n  0-1 matrices
Page number: 1427
with full rank over GF (2) cannot include all permutations of Sn . Let’ s
extend the class of permutations defined by matrix-vector multiplication to
include an additive term, so that x  ∈  Sn  maps to Ax  + c , where c  is an n -bit
vector and addition is performed over GF (2). For example, when
and
we get the following permutation πA,c : πA,c (0) = 2, πA,c (1) = 1, πA,c (2) = 0,
πA,c (3) = 3. W e call any permutation that maps x  ∈  Sn  to Ax  + c , for some n
× n  0-1 matrix A  with full rank and some n -bit vector c , a linear
permutation .
d.  Use a counting ar gument to show that the number of linear permutations
of Sn  is much less than the number of permutations of Sn .
e.  Give an example of a value of n  and a permutation of Sn  that cannot be
achieved by any linear permutation. ( Hint:  For a given permutation, think
about how multiplying a matrix by a unit vector relates to the columns of
the matrix.)
Appendix notes
Linear -algebra textbooks provide plenty of background information on
matrices. The books by Strang [ 422 , 423 ] are particularly good.
Page number: 1428
Bibliography
    [1]  Milton Abramowitz and Irene A. Stegun, editors. Handbook of Mathematical Functions .
Dover , 1965.
    [2]  G. M. Adel’ son-V el’ ski ĭ  and E. M. Landis. An algorithm for the or ganization of information.
Soviet Mathematics Doklady , 3(5):1259–1263, 1962.
    [3]  Alok Aggarwal and Jef frey Scott V itter . The input/output complexity of sorting and related
problems. Communications of the ACM , 31(9):1 1 16–1 127, 1988.
    [4]  Manindra Agrawal, Neeraj Kayal, and Nitin Saxena. PRIMES is in P . Annals of Mathematics ,
160(2):781–793, 2004.
    [5]  Alfred V . Aho, John E. Hopcroft, and Jef frey D. Ullman. The Design and Analysis of
Computer Algorithms . Addison-W esley , 1974.
    [6]  Alfred V . Aho, John E. Hopcroft, and Jef frey D. Ullman. Data Structur es and Algorithms .
Addison-W esley , 1983.
    [7]  Ravindra K. Ahuja, Thomas L. Magnanti, and James B. Orlin. Network Flows: Theory ,
Algorithms, and Applications . Prentice Hall, 1993.
    [8]  Ravindra K. Ahuja, Kurt Mehlhorn, James B. Orlin, and Robert E. T arjan. Faster algorithms
for the shortest path problem. Journal of the ACM , 37(2):213–223, 1990.
    [9]  Ravindra K. Ahuja and James B. Orlin. A fast and simple algorithm for the maximum flow
problem. Operations Resear ch , 37(5):748–759, 1989.
  [10]  Ravindra K. Ahuja, James B. Orlin, and Robert E. T arjan. Improved time bounds for the
maximum flow problem. SIAM Journal on Computing , 18(5):939–954, 1989.
  [1 1]  Miklós Ajtai, Nimrod Megiddo, and Orli W aarts. Improved algorithms and analysis for
secretary problems and generalizations. SIAM Journal on Discr ete Mathematics , 14(1):1–27,
2001.
  [12]  Selim G. Akl. The Design and Analysis of Parallel Algorithms . Prentice Hall, 1989.
  [13]  Mohamad Akra and Louay Bazzi. On the solution of linear recurrence equations.
Computational Optimization and Applications , 10(2):195–210, 1998.
  [14]  Susanne Albers. Online algorithms: A survey . Mathematical Pr ogramming , 97(1-2):3–26,
2003.
  [15]  Noga Alon. Generating pseudo-random permutations and maximum flow algorithms.
Information Pr ocessing Letters , 35:201–204, 1990.
Page number: 1429
  [16]  Arne Andersson. Balanced search trees made simple. In Pr oceedings of the Thir d W orkshop on
Algorithms and Data Structur es , volume 709 of Lectur e Notes in Computer Science , pages 60–
71. Springer , 1993.
  [17]  Arne Andersson. Faster deterministic sorting and searching in linear space. In Pr oceedings of
the 37th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science , pages 135–141, 1996.
  [18]  Arne Andersson, T orben Hagerup, Stefan Nilsson, and Rajeev Raman. Sorting in linear time?
Journal of Computer and System Sciences , 57:74–93, 1998.
  [19]  T om M. Apostol. Calculus , volume 1. Blaisdell Publishing Company , second edition, 1967.
  [20]  Nimar S. Arora, Robert D. Blumofe, and C. Greg Plaxton. Thread scheduling for
multiprogrammed multiprocessors. Theory of Computing Systems , 34(2):1 15–144, 2001.
  [21]  Sanjeev Arora. Pr obabilistic checking of pr oofs and the har dness of appr oximation pr oblems .
PhD thesis, University of California, Berkeley , 1994.
  [22]  Sanjeev Arora. The approximability of NP-hard problems. In Pr oceedings of the 30th Annual
ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing , pages 337–348, 1998.
  [23]  Sanjeev Arora. Polynomial time approximation schemes for euclidean traveling salesman and
other geometric problems. Journal of the ACM , 45(5):753–782, 1998.
  [24]  Sanjeev Arora and Boaz Barak. Computational Complexity: A Modern Appr oach . Cambridge
University Press, 2009.
  [25]  Sanjeev Arora, Elad Hazan, and Satyen Kale. The multiplicative weights update method: A
meta-algorithm and applications. Theory of Computing , 8(1):121–164, 2012.
  [26]  Sanjeev Arora and Carsten Lund. Hardness of approximations. In Dorit S. Hochbaum, editor ,
Appr oximation Algorithms for NP-Har d Pr oblems , pages 399–446. PWS Publishing Company ,
1997.
  [27]  Mikhail J. Atallah and Marina Blanton, editors. Algorithms and Theory of Computation
Handbook , volume 1. Chapman & Hall/CRC Press, second edition, 2009.
  [28]  Mikhail J. Atallah and Marina Blanton, editors. Algorithms and Theory of Computation
Handbook , volume 2. Chapman & Hall/CRC Press, second edition, 2009.
  [29]  G. Ausiello, P . Crescenzi, G. Gambosi, V . Kann, A. Marchetti-Spaccamela, and M. Protasi.
Complexity and Appr oximation: Combinatorial Optimization Pr oblems and Their
Appr oximability Pr operties . Springer , 1999.
  [30]  Shai A vidan and Ariel Shamir . Seam carving for content-aware image resizing. ACM
T ransactions on Graphics , 26(3), article 10, 2007.
  [31]  László Babai, Eugene M. Luks, and Ákos Seress. Fast management of permutation groups I.
SIAM Journal on Computing , 26(5):1310–1342, 1997.
  [32]  Eric Bach. Private communication, 1989.
  [33]  Eric Bach. Number -theoretic algorithms. In Annual Review of Computer Science , volume 4,
pages 1 19–172. Annual Reviews, Inc., 1990.
  [34]  Eric Bach and Jef frey Shallit. Algorithmic Number Theory—V olume I: Efficient Algorithms .
The MIT Press, 1996.
  [35]  Nikhil Bansal and Anupam Gupta. Potential-function proofs for first-order methods. CoRR ,
abs/1712.04581, 2017.
Page number: 1430
  [36]  Hannah Bast, Daniel Delling, Andrew V . Goldber g, Matthias Müller -Hannemann, Thomas
Pajor , Peter Sanders, Dorothea W agner , and Renato F . W erneck. Route planning in
transportation networks. In Algorithm Engineering - Selected Results and Surveys , volume
9220 of Lectur e Notes in Computer Science , pages 19–80. Springer , 2016.
  [37]  Surender Baswana, Ramesh Hariharan, and Sandeep Sen. Improved decremental algorithms
for maintaining transitive closure and all-pairs shortest paths. Journal of Algorithms , 62(2):74–
92, 2007.
  [38]  R. Bayer . Symmetric binary B-trees: Data structure and maintenance algorithms. Acta
Informatica , 1(4):290–306, 1972.
  [39]  R. Bayer and E. M. McCreight. Or ganization and maintenance of lar ge ordered indexes. Acta
Informatica , 1(3):173–189, 1972.
  [40]  Pierre Beauchemin, Gilles Brassard, Claude Crépeau, Claude Goutier , and Carl Pomerance.
The generation of random numbers that are probably prime. Journal of Cryptology , 1(1):53–
64, 1988.
  [41]  L. A. Belady . A study of replacement algorithms for a virtual-storage computer . IBM Systems
Journal , 5(2):78–101, 1966.
  [42]  Mihir Bellare, Joe Kilian, and Phillip Rogaway . The security of cipher block chaining message
authentication code. Journal of Computer and System Sciences , 61(3):362–399, 2000.
  [43]  Mihir Bellare and Phillip Rogaway . Random oracles are practical: A paradigm for designing
ef ficient protocols. In CCS ’93, Pr oceedings of the 1st ACM Confer ence on Computer and
Communications Security , pages 62–73, 1993.
  [44]  Richard Bellman. Dynamic Pr ogramming . Princeton University Press, 1957.
  [45]  Richard Bellman. On a routing problem. Quarterly of Applied Mathematics , 16(1):87–90,
1958.
  [46]  Michael Ben-Or . Lower bounds for algebraic computation trees. In Pr oceedings of the
Fifteenth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing , pages 80–86, 1983.
  [47]  Michael A. Bender , Erik D. Demaine, and Martin Farach-Colton. Cache-oblivious B-trees.
SIAM Journal on Computing , 35(2):341–358, 2005.
  [48]  Samuel W . Bent and John W . John. Finding the median requires 2 n  comparisons. In
Pr oceedings of the Seventeenth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing , pages 213–
216, 1985.
  [49]  Jon L. Bentley . W riting Efficient Pr ograms . Prentice Hall, 1982.
  [50]  Jon L. Bentley . Mor e Pr ogramming Pearls: Confessions of a Coder . Addison-W esley , 1988.
  [51]  Jon L. Bentley . Pr ogramming Pearls . Addison-W esley , second edition, 1999.
  [52]  Jon L. Bentley , Dorothea Haken, and James B. Saxe. A general method for solving divide-and-
conquer recurrences. SIGACT News , 12(3):36–44, 1980.
  [53]  Claude Ber ge. T wo theorems in graph theory . Pr oceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences , 43(9):842–844, 1957.
  [54]  Aditya Y . Bhar gava. Gr okking Algorithms: An Illustrated Guide For Pr ogrammers and Other
Curious People . Manning Publications, 2016.
Page number: 1431
  [55]  Daniel Bienstock and Benjamin McClosky . T ightening simplex mixed-integer sets with
guaranteed bounds. Optimization Online , 2008.
  [56]  Patrick Billingsley . Pr obability and Measur e . John W iley & Sons, second edition, 1986.
  [57]  Guy E. Blelloch. Scan Primitives and Parallel V ector Models . PhD thesis, Department of
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, MIT , 1989. A vailable as MIT Laboratory for
Computer Science T echnical Report MIT/LCS/TR-463.
  [58]  Guy E. Blelloch. Programming parallel algorithms. Communications of the ACM , 39(3):85–
97, 1996.
  [59]  Guy E. Blelloch, Jeremy T . Fineman, Phillip B. Gibbons, and Julian Shun. Internally
deterministic parallel algorithms can be fast. In 17th ACM SIGPLAN Symposium on Principles
and Practice of Parallel Pr ogramming , pages 181–192, 2012.
  [60]  Guy E. Blelloch, Jeremy T . Fineman, Y an Gu, and Y ihan Sun. Optimal parallel algorithms in
the binary-forking model. In Pr oceedings of the 32nd Annual ACM Symposium on Parallelism
in Algorithms and Ar chitectur es , pages 89–102, 2020.
  [61]  Guy E. Blelloch, Phillip B. Gibbons, and Y ossi Matias. Provably ef ficient scheduling for
languages with fine-grained parallelism. Journal of the ACM , 46(2):281–321, 1999.
  [62]  Manuel Blum, Robert W . Floyd, V aughan Pratt, Ronald L. Rivest, and Robert E. T arjan. T ime
bounds for selection. Journal of Computer and System Sciences , 7(4):448–461, 1973.
  [63]  Robert D. Blumofe and Charles E. Leiserson. Scheduling multithreaded computations by work
stealing. Journal of the ACM , 46(5):720–748, 1999.
  [64]  Robert L Bocchino, Jr ., V ikram S. Adve, Sarita V . Adve, and Marc Snir . Parallel programming
must be deterministic by default. In Pr oceedings of the First USENIX Confer ence on Hot
T opics in Parallelism (HotPar) , 2009.
  [65]  Béla Bollobás. Random Graphs . Academic Press, 1985.
  [66]  Leonardo Bonacci. Liber Abaci , 1202.
  [67]  J. A. Bondy and U. S. R. Murty . Graph Theory with Applications . American Elsevier , 1976.
  [68]  A. Borodin and R. El-Y aniv . Online Computation and Competitive Analysis . Cambridge
University Press, 1998.
  [69]  Stephen P . Boyd and Lieven V andenber ghe. Convex Optimization . Cambridge University
Press, 2004.
  [70]  Gilles Brassard and Paul Bratley . Fundamentals of Algorithmics . Prentice Hall, 1996.
  [71]  Richard P . Brent. The parallel evaluation of general arithmetic expressions. Journal of the
ACM , 21(2):201–206, 1974.
  [72]  Gerth Stølting Brodal. A survey on priority queues. In Andrej Brodnik, Alejandro López-
Ortiz, V enkatesh Raman, and Alfredo V iola, editors, Space-Efficient Data Structur es, Str eams,
and Algorithms: Papers in Honor of J. Ian Munr o on the Occasion of His 66th Birthday ,
volume 8066 of Lectur e Notes in Computer Science , pages 150–163. Springer , 2013.
  [73]  Gerth Stølting Brodal, Geor ge Lagogiannis, and Robert E. T arjan. Strict Fibonacci heaps. In
Pr oceedings of the 44th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing , pages 1 177–1 184,
2012.
Page number: 1432
  [74]  Geor ge W . Brown. Some notes on computation of games solutions. RAND Corporation
Report , P-78, 1949.
  [75]  Sébastien Bubeck. Convex optimization: Algorithms and complexity . Foundations and T r ends
in Machine Learning , 8(3-4):231–357, 2015.
  [76]  Niv Buchbinder and Joseph Naor . The design of competitive online algorithms via a primal-
dual approach. Foundations and T r ends in Theor etical Computer Science , 3(2–3):93–263,
2009.
  [77]  J. P . Buhler , H. W . Lenstra, Jr ., and Carl Pomerance. Factoring integers with the number field
sieve. In A. K. Lenstra and H. W . Lenstra, Jr ., editors, The Development of the Number Field
Sieve , volume 1554 of Lectur e Notes in Mathematics , pages 50–94. Springer , 1993.
  [78]  M. Burrows and D. J. Wheeler . A block-sorting lossless data compression algorithm. SRC
Research Report 124, Digital Equipment Corporation Systems Research Center , May 1994.
  [79]  Neville Campbell. Recurrences. Unpublished treatise available at
https://nevillecampbell.com/Recurrences.pdf , 2020.
  [80]  J. Lawrence Carter and Mark N. W egman. Universal classes of hash functions. Journal of
Computer and System Sciences , 18(2):143–154, 1979.
  [81]  Barbara Chapman, Gabriele Jost, and Ruud van der Pas. Using OpenMP: Portable Shar ed
Memory Parallel Pr ogramming . The MIT Press, 2007.
  [82]  Philippe Charles, Christian Grothof f, V ijay Saraswat, Christopher Donawa, Allan Kielstra,
Kemal Ebcioglu, Christoph V on Praun, and V ivek Sarkar . X10: An object-oriented approach to
non-uniform cluster computing. In ACM SIGPLAN Confer ence on Object-oriented
Pr ogramming, Systems, Languages, and Applications (OOPSLA) , pages 519–538, 2005.
  [83]  Bernard Chazelle. A minimum spanning tree algorithm with inverse-Ackermann type
complexity . Journal of the ACM , 47(6):1028–1047, 2000.
  [84]  Ke Chen and Adrian Dumitrescu. Selection algorithms with small groups. International
Journal of Foundations of Computer Science , 31(3):355–369, 2020.
  [85]  Guang-Ien Cheng, Mingdong Feng, Charles E. Leiserson, Keith H. Randall, and Andrew F .
Stark. Detecting data races in Cilk programs that use locks. In Pr oceedings of the 10th Annual
ACM Symposium on Parallel Algorithms and Ar chitectur es , pages 298–309, 1998.
  [86]  Joseph Cheriyan and T orben Hagerup. A randomized maximum-flow algorithm. SIAM Journal
on Computing , 24(2):203–226, 1995.
  [87]  Joseph Cheriyan and S. N. Maheshwari. Analysis of preflow push algorithms for maximum
network flow . SIAM Journal on Computing , 18(6):1057–1086, 1989.
  [88]  Boris V . Cherkassky and Andrew V . Goldber g. On implementing the push-relabel method for
the maximum flow problem. Algorithmica , 19(4):390–410, 1997.
  [89]  Boris V . Cherkassky , Andrew V . Goldber g, and T omasz Radzik. Shortest paths algorithms:
Theory and experimental evaluation. Mathematical Pr ogramming , 73(2):129–174, 1996.
  [90]  Boris V . Cherkassky , Andrew V . Goldber g, and Craig Silverstein. Buckets, heaps, lists and
monotone priority queues. SIAM Journal on Computing , 28(4):1326–1346, 1999.
  [91]  H. Chernof f. A measure of asymptotic ef ficiency for tests of a hypothesis based on the sum of
observations. Annals of Mathematical Statistics , 23(4):493–507, 1952.
Page number: 1433
  [92]  Brian Christian and T om Grif fiths. Algorithms to Live By: The Computer Science of Human
Decisions . Picador , 2017.
  [93]  Kai Lai Chung. Elementary Pr obability Theory with Stochastic Pr ocesses . Springer , 1974.
  [94]  V . Chvátal. Linear Pr ogramming . W . H. Freeman and Company , 1983.
  [95]  V . Chvátal, D. A. Klarner , and D. E. Knuth. Selected combinatorial research problems.
T echnical Report ST AN-CS-72-292, Computer Science Department, Stanford University ,
1972.
  [96]  Alan Cobham. The intrinsic computational dif ficulty of functions. In Pr oceedings of the 1964
Congr ess for Logic, Methodology , and the Philosophy of Science , pages 24–30. North-Holland,
1964.
  [97]  H. Cohen and H. W . Lenstra, Jr . Primality testing and Jacobi sums. Mathematics of
Computation , 42(165):297–330, 1984.
  [98]  Michael B. Cohen, Aleksander Madry , Piotr Sankowski, and Adrian Vladu. Negative-weight
shortest paths and unit capacity minimum cost flow in Õ ( m10/7 log w ) time (extended
abstract). In Pr oceedings of the 28th ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discr ete Algorithms , pages
752–771, 2017.
  [99]  Douglas Comer . The ubiquitous B-tree. ACM Computing Surveys , 1 1(2):121–137, 1979.
[100]  Stephen Cook. The complexity of theorem proving procedures. In Pr oceedings of the Thir d
Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing , pages 151–158, 1971.
[101]  James W . Cooley and John W . T ukey . An algorithm for the machine calculation of complex
Fourier series. Mathematics of Computation , 19(90):297–301, 1965.
[102]  Don Coppersmith. Modifications to the number field sieve. Journal of Cryptology , 6(3):169–
180, 1993.
[103]  Don Coppersmith and Shmuel W inograd. Matrix multiplication via arithmetic progression.
Journal of Symbolic Computation , 9(3):251–280, 1990.
[104]  Thomas H. Cormen. Algorithms Unlocked . The MIT Press, 2013.
[105]  Thomas H. Cormen, Thomas Sundquist, and Leonard F . W isniewski. Asymptotically tight
bounds for performing BMMC permutations on parallel disk systems. SIAM Journal on
Computing , 28(1):105–136, 1998.
[106]  Don Dailey and Charles E. Leiserson. Using Cilk to write multiprocessor chess programs. In
H. J. van den Herik and B. Monien, editors, Advances in Computer Games , volume 9, pages
25–52. University of Maastricht, Netherlands, 2001.
[107]  Sanjoy Dasgupta, Christos Papadimitriou, and Umesh V azirani. Algorithms . McGraw-Hill,
2008.
[108]  Abraham de Moivre. De fractionibus algebraicis radicalitate immunibus ad fractiones
simpliciores reducendis, deque summandis terminis quarundam serierum aequali intervallo a se
distantibus. Philosophical T ransactions , 32(373):162–168, 1722.
[109]  Erik D. Demaine, Dion Harmon, John Iacono, and Mihai P ǎ tra ş cu. Dynamic optimality—
almost. SIAM Journal on Computing , 37(1):240–251, 2007.
[1 10]  Camil Demetrescu, David Eppstein, Zvi Galik, and Giuseppe F . Italiano. Dynamic graph
algorithms. In Mikhail J. Attalah and Marina Blanton, editors, Algorithms and Theory of
Page number: 1434
Computation Handbook , chapter 9 , pages 9-1–9-28. Chapman & Hall/CRC, second edition,
2009.
[1 1 1]  Camil Demetrescu and Giuseppe F . Italiano. Fully dynamic all pairs shortest paths with real
edge weights. Journal of Computer and System Sciences , 72(5):813–837, 2006.
[1 12]  Eric V . Denardo and Bennett L. Fox. Shortest-route methods: 1. Reaching, pruning, and
buckets. Operations Resear ch , 27(1):161–186, 1979.
[1 13]  Martin Dietzfelbinger , T orben Hagerup, Jyrki Katajainen, and Martti Penttonen. A reliable
randomized algorithm for the closest-pair problem. Journal of Algorithms , 25(1):19–51, 1997.
[1 14]  Martin Dietzfelbinger , Anna Karlin, Kurt Mehlhorn, Friedhelm Meyer auf der Heide, Hans
Rohnert, and Robert E. T arjan. Dynamic perfect hashing: Upper and lower bounds. SIAM
Journal on Computing , 23(4):738–761, 1994.
[1 15]  Whitfield Dif fie and Martin E. Hellman. New directions in cryptography . IEEE T ransactions
on Information Theory , IT -22(6):644–654, 1976.
[1 16]  Edsger W . Dijkstra. A note on two problems in connexion with graphs. Numerische
Mathematik , 1(1):269–271, 1959.
[1 17]  Edsger W . Dijkstra. A Discipline of Pr ogramming . Prentice-Hall, 1976.
[1 18]  Dimitar Dimitrov , Martin V echev , and V ivek Sarkar . Race detection in two dimensions. ACM
T ransactions on Parallel Computing , 4(4):1–22, 2018.
[1 19]  E. A. Dinic. Algorithm for solution of a problem of maximum flow in a network with power
estimation. Soviet Mathematics Doklady , 1 1(5):1277–1280, 1970.
[120]  Brandon Dixon, Monika Rauch, and Robert E. T arjan. V erification and sensitivity analysis of
minimum spanning trees in linear time. SIAM Journal on Computing , 21(6):1 184–1 192, 1992.
[121]  John D. Dixon. Factorization and primality tests. The American Mathematical Monthly ,
91(6):333–352, 1984.
[122]  Dorit Dor , Johan Håstad, Staf fan Ulfber g, and Uri Zwick. On lower bounds for selecting the
median. SIAM Journal on Discr ete Mathematics , 14(3):299–31 1, 2001.
[123]  Dorit Dor and Uri Zwick. Selecting the median. SIAM Journal on Computing , 28(5):1722–
1758, 1999.
[124]  Dorit Dor and Uri Zwick. Median selection requires (2 + ϵ ) n  comparisons. SIAM Journal on
Discr ete Mathematics , 14(3):312–325, 2001.
[125]  Alvin W . Drake. Fundamentals of Applied Pr obability Theory . McGraw-Hill, 1967.
[126]  James R. Driscoll, Neil Sarnak, Daniel D. Sleator , and Robert E. T arjan. Making data
structures persistent. Journal of Computer and System Sciences , 38(1):86–124, 1989.
[127]  Ran Duan, Seth Pettie, and Hsin-Hao Su. Scaling algorithms for weighted matching in general
graphs. ACM T ransactions on Algorithms , 14(1):8:1–8:35, 2018.
[128]  Richard Durstenfeld. Algorithm 235 (RANDOM PERMUT A TION). Communications of the
ACM , 7(7):420, 1964.
[129]  Derek L. Eager , John Zahorjan, and Edward D. Lazowska. Speedup versus ef ficiency in
parallel systems. IEEE T ransactions on Computers , 38(3):408–423, 1989.
[130]  Jack Edmonds. Paths, trees, and flowers. Canadian Journal of Mathematics , 17:449–467,
1965.
Page number: 1435
[131]  Jack Edmonds. Matroids and the greedy algorithm. Mathematical Pr ogramming , 1(1):127–
136, 1971.
[132]  Jack Edmonds and Richard M. Karp. Theoretical improvements in the algorithmic ef ficiency
for network flow problems. Journal of the ACM , 19(2):248–264, 1972.
[133]  Jef f Edmonds. How T o Think About Algorithms . Cambridge University Press, 2008.
[134]  Mourad Elloumi and Albert Y . Zomaya, editors. Algorithms in Computational Molecular
Biology: T echniques, Appr oaches and Applications . John W iley & Sons, 201 1.
[135]  Jef f Erickson. Algorithms . https://archive.or g/details/Algorithms-Jef f-Erickson , 2019.
[136]  Martin Erwig. Once Upon an Algorithm: How Stories Explain Computing . The MIT Press,
2017.
[137]  Shimon Even. Graph Algorithms . Computer Science Press, 1979.
[138]  Shimon Even and Y ossi Shiloach. An on-line edge-deletion problem. Journal of the ACM ,
28(1):1–4, 1981.
[139]  W illiam Feller . An Intr oduction to Pr obability Theory and Its Applications . John W iley &
Sons, third edition, 1968.
[140]  Mingdong Feng and Charles E. Leiserson. Ef ficient detection of determinacy races in Cilk
programs. In Pr oceedings of the 9th Annual ACM Symposium on Parallel Algorithms and
Ar chitectur es , pages 1–1 1, 1997.
[141]  Amos Fiat, Richard M. Karp, Michael Luby , L yle A. McGeoch, Daniel Dominic Sleator , and
Neal E. Y oung. Competitive paging algorithms. Journal of Algorithms , 12(4):685–699, 1991.
[142]  Amos Fiat and Gerhard J. W oeginger , editors. Online Algorithms, The State of the Art , volume
1442 of Lectur e Notes in Computer Science . Springer , 1998.
[143]  Sir Ronald A. Fisher and Frank Y ates. Statistical T ables for Biological, Agricultural and
Medical Resear ch . Hafner Publishing Company , fifth edition, 1957.
[144]  Robert W . Floyd. Algorithm 97 (SHOR TEST P A TH). Communications of the ACM , 5(6):345,
1962.
[145]  Robert W . Floyd. Algorithm 245 (TREESOR T). Communications of the ACM , 7(12):701,
1964.
[146]  Robert W . Floyd. Permuting information in idealized two-level storage. In Raymond E. Miller
and James W . Thatcher , editors, Complexity of Computer Computations , pages 105–109.
Plenum Press, 1972.
[147]  Robert W . Floyd and Ronald L. Rivest. Expected time bounds for selection. Communications
of the ACM , 18(3):165–172, 1975.
[148]  L. R. Ford. Network Flow Theory .  RAND Corporation, Santa Monica, CA, 1956.
[149]  Lestor R. Ford, Jr . and D. R. Fulkerson. Flows in Networks . Princeton University Press, 1962.
[150]  Lestor R. Ford, Jr . and Selmer M. Johnson. A tournament problem. The American
Mathematical Monthly , 66(5):387–389, 1959.
[151]  E. W . For gy . Cluster analysis of multivariate ef ficiency versus interpretatbility of
classifications. Biometrics , 21(3):768–769, 1965.
Page number: 1436
[152]  Lance Fortnow . The Golden T icket: P , NP , and the Sear ch for the Impossible . Princeton
University Press, 2013.
[153]  Michael L. Fredman. New bounds on the complexity of the shortest path problem. SIAM
Journal on Computing , 5(1):83–89, 1976.
[154]  Michael L. Fredman, János Komlós, and Endre Szemerédi. Storing a sparse table with O (1)
worst case access time. Journal of the ACM , 31(3):538–544, 1984.
[155]  Michael L. Fredman and Michael E. Saks. The cell probe complexity of dynamic data
structures. In Pr oceedings of the T wenty First Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of
Computing , pages 345–354, 1989.
[156]  Michael L. Fredman and Robert E. T arjan. Fibonacci heaps and their uses in improved
network optimization algorithms. Journal of the ACM , 34(3):596–615, 1987.
[157]  Michael L. Fredman and Dan E. W illard. Surpassing the information theoretic bound with
fusion trees. Journal of Computer and System Sciences , 47(3):424–436, 1993.
[158]  Michael L. Fredman and Dan E. W illard. T rans-dichotomous algorithms for minimum
spanning trees and shortest paths. Journal of Computer and System Sciences , 48(3):533–551,
1994.
[159]  Y oav Freund and Robert E. Schapire. A decision-theoretic generalization of on-line learning
and an application to boosting. Journal of Computer and System Sciences , 55(1):1 19–139,
1997.
[160]  Matteo Frigo, Pablo Halpern, Charles E. Leiserson, and Stephen Lewin-Berlin. Reducers and
other Cilk++ hyperobjects. In Pr oceedings of the 21st Annual ACM Symposium on Parallelism
in Algorithms and Ar chitectur es , pages 79–90, 2009.
[161]  Matteo Frigo and Steven G. Johnson. The design and implementation of FFTW3. Pr oceedings
of the IEEE , 93(2):216–231, 2005.
[162]  Hannah Fry . Hello W orld: Being Human in the Age of Algorithms . W . W . Norton & Company ,
2018.
[163]  Harold N. Gabow . Path-based depth-first search for strong and biconnected components.
Information Pr ocessing Letters , 74(3–4):107–1 14, 2000.
[164]  Harold N. Gabow . The weighted matching approach to maximum cardinality matching.
Fundamenta Informaticae , 154(1-4):109–130, 2017.
[165]  Harold N. Gabow , Z. Galil, T . Spencer , and Robert E. T arjan. Ef ficient algorithms for finding
minimum spanning trees in undirected and directed graphs. Combinatorica , 6(2):109–122,
1986.
[166]  Harold N. Gabow and Robert E. T arjan. A linear -time algorithm for a special case of disjoint
set union. Journal of Computer and System Sciences , 30(2):209–221, 1985.
[167]  Harold N. Gabow and Robert E. T arjan. Faster scaling algorithms for network problems. SIAM
Journal on Computing , 18(5):1013–1036, 1989.
[168]  Harold N. Gabow and Robert Endre T arjan. Faster scaling algorithms for general graph-
matching problems. Journal of the ACM , 38(4):815–853, 1991.
[169]  D. Gale and L. S. Shapley . College admissions and the stability of marriage. American
Mathematical Monthly , 69(1):9–15, 1962.
Page number: 1437
[170]  Zvi Galil and Oded Mar galit. All pairs shortest distances for graphs with small integer length
edges. Information and Computation , 134(2):103–139, 1997.
[171]  Zvi Galil and Oded Mar galit. All pairs shortest paths for graphs with small integer length
edges. Journal of Computer and System Sciences , 54(2):243–254, 1997.
[172]  Zvi Galil and Kunsoo Park. Dynamic programming with convexity , concavity and sparsity .
Theor etical Computer Science , 92(1):49–76, 1992.
[173]  Zvi Galil and Joel Seiferas. T ime-space-optimal string matching. Journal of Computer and
System Sciences , 26(3):280–294, 1983.
[174]  Igal Galperin and Ronald L. Rivest. Scapegoat trees. In Pr oceedings of the 4th ACM-SIAM
Symposium on Discr ete Algorithms , pages 165–174, 1993.
[175]  Michael R. Garey , R. L. Graham, and J. D. Ullman. W orst-case analyis of memory allocation
algorithms. In Pr oceedings of the Fourth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing ,
pages 143–150, 1972.
[176]  Michael R. Garey and David S. Johnson. Computers and Intractability: A Guide to the Theory
of NP-Completeness . W . H. Freeman, 1979.
[177]  Naveen Gar g and Jochen Könemann. Faster and simpler algorithms for multicommodity flow
and other fractional packing problems. SIAM Journal on Computing , 37(2):630–652, 2007.
[178]  Saul Gass. Linear Pr ogramming: Methods and Applications . International Thomson
Publishing, fourth edition, 1975.
[179]  F ă nic ă  Gavril. Algorithms for minimum coloring, maximum clique, minimum covering by
cliques, and maximum independent set of a chordal graph. SIAM Journal on Computing ,
1(2):180–187, 1972.
[180]  Alan Geor ge and Joseph W -H Liu. Computer Solution of Lar ge Sparse Positive Definite
Systems . Prentice Hall, 1981.
[181]  E. N. Gilbert and E. F . Moore. V ariable-length binary encodings. Bell System T echnical
Journal , 38(4):933–967, 1959.
[182]  Ashish Goel, Sanjeev Khanna, Daniel H. Larkin, and Rober E. T arjan. Disjoint set union with
randomized linking. In Pr oceedings of the 25th ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discr ete
Algorithms , pages 1005–1017, 2014.
[183]  Michel X. Goemans and David P . W illiamson. Improved approximation algorithms for
maximum cut and satisfiability problems using semidefinite programming. Journal of the
ACM , 42(6):1 1 15–1 145, 1995.
[184]  Michel X. Goemans and David P . W illiamson. The primal-dual method for approximation
algorithms and its application to network design problems. In Dorit S. Hochbaum, editor ,
Appr oximation Algorithms for NP-Har d Pr oblems , pages 144–191. PWS Publishing Company ,
1997.
[185]  Andrew V . Goldber g. Efficient Graph Algorithms for Sequential and Parallel Computers . PhD
thesis, Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, MIT , 1987.
[186]  Andrew V . Goldber g. Scaling algorithms for the shortest paths problem. SIAM Journal on
Computing , 24(3):494–504, 1995.
[187]  Andrew V . Goldber g and Satish Rao. Beyond the flow decomposition barrier . Journal of the
ACM , 45(5):783–797, 1998.
Page number: 1438
[188]  Andrew V . Goldber g and Robert E. T arjan. A new approach to the maximum flow problem.
Journal of the ACM , 35(4):921–940, 1988.
[189]  D. Goldfarb and M. J. T odd. Linear programming. In G. L. Nemhauser , A. H. G. Rinnooy-
Kan, and M. J. T odd, editors, Handbooks in Operations Resear ch and Management Science,
V ol. 1, Optimization , pages 73–170. Elsevier Science Publishers, 1989.
[190]  Shafi Goldwasser and Silvio Micali. Probabilistic encryption. Journal of Computer and System
Sciences , 28(2):270–299, 1984.
[191]  Shafi Goldwasser , Silvio Micali, and Ronald L. Rivest. A digital signature scheme secure
against adaptive chosen-message attacks. SIAM Journal on Computing , 17(2):281–308, 1988.
[192]  Gene H. Golub and Charles F . V an Loan. Matrix Computations . The Johns Hopkins University
Press, third edition, 1996.
[193]  G. H. Gonnet and R. Baeza-Y ates. Handbook of Algorithms and Data Structur es in Pascal and
C . Addison-W esley , second edition, 1991.
[194]  Rafael C. Gonzalez and Richard E. W oods. Digital Image Pr ocessing . Addison-W esley , 1992.
[195]  Michael T . Goodrich and Roberto T amassia. Algorithm Design: Foundations, Analysis, and
Internet Examples . John W iley & Sons, 2001.
[196]  Michael T . Goodrich and Roberto T amassia. Data Structur es and Algorithms in Java . John
W iley & Sons, sixth edition, 2014.
[197]  Ronald L. Graham. Bounds for certain multiprocessor anomalies. Bell System T echnical
Journal , 45(9):1563–1581, 1966.
[198]  Ronald L. Graham and Pavol Hell. On the history of the minimum spanning tree problem.
Annals of the History of Computing , 7(1):43–57, 1985.
[199]  Ronald L. Graham, Donald E. Knuth, and Oren Patashnik. Concr ete Mathematics . Addison-
W esley , second edition, 1994.
[200]  David Gries. The Science of Pr ogramming . Springer , 1981.
[201]  M. Grötschel, László Lovász, and Alexander Schrijver . Geometric Algorithms and
Combinatorial Optimization . Springer , 1988.
[202]  Leo J. Guibas and Robert Sedgewick. A dichromatic framework for balanced trees. In
Pr oceedings of the 19th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science , pages 8–21,
1978.
[203]  Dan Gusfield and Robert W . Irving. The Stable Marriage Pr oblem: Structur e and Algorithms .
The MIT Press, 1989.
[204]  Gregory Gutin and Abraham P . Punnen, editors. The T raveling Salesman Pr oblem and Its
V ariations . Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2002.
[205]  T orben Hagerup. Improved shortest paths on the word RAM. In Pr ocedings of 27th
International Colloquium on Automata, Languages and Pr ogramming, ICALP 2000 , volume
1853 of Lectur e Notes in Computer Science , pages 61–72. Springer , 2000.
[206]  H. Halberstam and R. E. Ingram, editors. The Mathematical Papers of Sir W illiam Rowan
Hamilton , volume III (Algebra). Cambridge University Press, 1967.
[207]  Y ijie Han. Improved fast integer sorting in linear space. Information and Computation ,
170(1):81–94, 2001.
Page number: 1439
[208]  Frank Harary . Graph Theory . Addison-W esley , 1969.
[209]  Gregory C. Harfst and Edward M. Reingold. A potential-based amortized analysis of the
union-find data structure. SIGACT News , 31(3):86–95, 2000.
[210]  J. Hartmanis and R. E. Stearns. On the computational complexity of algorithms. T ransactions
of the American Mathematical Society , 1 17:285–306, 1965.
[21 1]  Michael T . Heideman, Don H. Johnson, and C. Sidney Burrus. Gauss and the history of the
Fast Fourier T ransform. IEEE ASSP Magazine , 1(4):14–21, 1984.
[212]  Monika R. Henzinger and V alerie King. Fully dynamic biconnectivity and transitive closure.
In Pr oceedings of the 36th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science , pages
664–672, 1995.
[213]  Monika R. Henzinger and V alerie King. Randomized fully dynamic graph algorithms with
polylogarithmic time per operation. Journal of the ACM , 46(4):502–516, 1999.
[214]  Monika R. Henzinger , Satish Rao, and Harold N. Gabow . Computing vertex connectivity:
New bounds from old techniques. Journal of Algorithms , 34(2):222–250, 2000.
[215]  Nicholas J. Higham. Exploiting fast matrix multiplication within the level 3 BLAS. ACM
T ransactions on Mathematical Softwar e , 16(4):352–368, 1990.
[216]  Nicholas J. Higham. Accuracy and Stability of Numerical Algorithms . SIAM, second edition,
2002.
[217]  W . Daniel Hillis and Jr . Guy L. Steele. Data parallel algorithms. Communications of the ACM ,
29(12):1 170–1 183, 1986.
[218]  C. A. R. Hoare. Algorithm 63 (P AR TITION) and algorithm 65 (FIND). Communications of
the ACM , 4(7):321–322, 1961.
[219]  C. A. R. Hoare. Quicksort. The Computer Journal , 5(1):10–15, 1962.
[220]  Dorit S. Hochbaum. Ef ficient bounds for the stable set, vertex cover and set packing problems.
Discr ete Applied Mathematics , 6(3):243–254, 1983.
[221]  Dorit S. Hochbaum, editor . Appr oximation Algorithms for NP-Har d Pr oblems . PWS
Publishing Company , 1997.
[222]  W . Hoef fding. On the distribution of the number of successes in independent trials. Annals of
Mathematical Statistics , 27(3):713–721, 1956.
[223]  Micha Hofri. Pr obabilistic Analysis of Algorithms . Springer , 1987.
[224]  John E. Hopcroft and Richard M. Karp. An n5/2 algorithm for maximum matchings in
bipartite graphs. SIAM Journal on Computing , 2(4):225–231, 1973.
[225]  John E. Hopcroft, Rajeev Motwani, and Jef frey D. Ullman. Intr oduction to Automata Theory ,
Languages, and Computation . Addison W esley , third edition, 2006.
[226]  John E. Hopcroft and Robert E. T arjan. Ef ficient algorithms for graph manipulation.
Communications of the ACM , 16(6):372–378, 1973.
[227]  John E. Hopcroft and Jef frey D. Ullman. Set mer ging algorithms. SIAM Journal on
Computing , 2(4):294–303, 1973.
[228]  John E. Hopcroft and Jef frey D. Ullman. Intr oduction to Automata Theory , Languages, and
Computation . Addison-W esley , 1979.
Page number: 1440
[229]  Juraj Hromkovi č . Algorithmics for Har d Pr oblems: Intr oduction to Combinatorial
Optimization, Randomization, Appr oximation, and Heuristics . Springer -V erlag, 2001.
[230]  T . C. Hu and M. T . Shing. Computation of matrix chain products. Part I. SIAM Journal on
Computing , 1 1(2):362–373, 1982.
[231]  T . C. Hu and M. T . Shing. Computation of matrix chain products. Part II. SIAM Journal on
Computing , 13(2):228–251, 1984.
[232]  T . C. Hu and A. C. T ucker . Optimal computer search trees and variable-length alphabetic
codes. SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics , 21(4):514–532, 1971.
[233]  David A. Huf fman. A method for the construction of minimum-redundancy codes.
Pr oceedings of the IRE , 40(9):1098–1 101, 1952.
[234]  Oscar H. Ibarra and Chul E. Kim. Fast approximation algorithms for the knapsack and sum of
subset problems. Journal of the ACM , 22(4):463–468, 1975.
[235]  E. J. Isaac and R. C. Singleton. Sorting by address calculation. Journal of the ACM , 3(3):169–
174, 1956.
[236]  David S. Johnson. Approximation algorithms for combinatorial problems. Journal of
Computer and System Sciences , 9(3):256–278, 1974.
[237]  David S. Johnson. The NP-completeness column: An ongoing guide—The tale of the second
prover . Journal of Algorithms , 13(3):502–524, 1992.
[238]  Donald B. Johnson. Ef ficient algorithms for shortest paths in sparse networks. Journal of the
ACM , 24(1):1–13, 1977.
[239]  Richard Johnsonbaugh and Marcus Schaefer . Algorithms . Pearson Prentice Hall, 2004.
[240]  Neil C. Jones and Pavel Pevzner . An Intr oduction to Bioinformatics Algorithms . The MIT
Press, 2004.
[241]  T . Kanungo, D. M. Mount, N. S. Netanyahu, C. D. Piatko, R. Silverman, and A. Y . W u. A
local search approximation algorithm for k -means clustering. Computational Geometry , 28:89–
1 12, 2004.
[242]  A. Karatsuba and Y u. Ofman. Multiplication of multidigit numbers on automata. Soviet
Physics—Doklady , 7(7):595–596, 1963. T ranslation of an article in Doklady Akademii Nauk
SSSR , 145(2), 1962.
[243]  David R. Kar ger , Philip N. Klein, and Robert E. T arjan. A randomized linear -time algorithm to
find minimum spanning trees. Journal of the ACM , 42(2):321–328, 1995.
[244]  David R. Kar ger , Daphne Koller , and Steven J. Phillips. Finding the hidden path: T ime bounds
for all-pairs shortest paths. SIAM Journal on Computing , 22(6):1 199–1217, 1993.
[245]  Juha Kärkkäinen, Peter Sanders, and Stefan Burkhardt. Linear work suf fix array construction.
Journal of the ACM , 53(6):918–936, 2006.
[246]  Howard Karlof f. Linear Pr ogramming . Birkhäuser , 1991.
[247]  N. Karmarkar . A new polynomial-time algorithm for linear programming. Combinatorica ,
4(4):373–395, 1984.
[248]  Richard M. Karp. Reducibility among combinatorial problems. In Raymond E. Miller and
James W . Thatcher , editors, Complexity of Computer Computations , pages 85–103. Plenum
Press, 1972.
Page number: 1441
[249]  Richard M. Karp. An introduction to randomized algorithms. Discr ete Applied Mathematics ,
34(1–3):165–201, 1991.
[250]  Richard M. Karp and Michael O. Rabin. Ef ficient randomized pattern-matching algorithms.
IBM Journal of Resear ch and Development , 31(2):249–260, 1987.
[251]  A. V . Karzanov . Determining the maximal flow in a network by the method of preflows. Soviet
Mathematics Doklady , 15(2):434–437, 1974.
[252]  T oru Kasai, Gunho Lee, Hiroki Arimura, Setsuo Arikawa, and Kunsoo Park. Linear -time
longest-common-prefix computation in suf fix arrays and its applications. In Pr oceedings of the
12th Annual Symposium on Combinatorial Pattern Matching , volume 2089, pages 181–192.
Springer -V erlag, 2001.
[253]  Jonathan Katz and Y ehuda Lindell. Intr oduction to Modern Cryptography . CRC Press, second
edition, 2015.
[254]  V alerie King. A simpler minimum spanning tree verification algorithm. Algorithmica ,
18(2):263–270, 1997.
[255]  V alerie King, Satish Rao, and Robert E. T arjan. A faster deterministic maximum flow
algorithm. Journal of Algorithms , 17(3):447–474, 1994.
[256]  Philip N. Klein and Neal E. Y oung. Approximation algorithms for NP-hard optimization
problems. In CRC Handbook on Algorithms , pages 34-1–34-19. CRC Press, 1999.
[257]  Jon Kleinber g and Éva T ardos. Algorithm Design . Addison-W esley , 2006.
[258]  Robert D. Kleinber g. A multiple-choice secretary algorithm with applications to online
auctions. In Pr oceedings of the 16th ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discr ete Algorithms , pages
630–631, 2005.
[259]  Donald E. Knuth. Fundamental Algorithms , volume 1 of The Art of Computer Pr ogramming .
Addison-W esley , third edition, 1997.
[260]  Donald E. Knuth. Seminumerical Algorithms , volume 2 of The Art of Computer Pr ogramming .
Addison-W esley , third edition, 1997.
[261]  Donald E. Knuth. Sorting and Sear ching , volume 3 of The Art of Computer Pr ogramming .
Addison-W esley , second edition, 1998.
[262]  Donald E. Knuth. Combinatorial Algorithms , volume 4A of The Art of Computer
Pr ogramming . Addison-W esley , 201 1.
[263]  Donald E. Knuth. Satisfiability , volume 4, fascicle 6 of The Art of Computer Pr ogramming .
Addison-W esley , 2015.
[264]  Donald E. Knuth. Optimum binary search trees. Acta Informatica , 1(1):14–25, 1971.
[265]  Donald E. Knuth. Big omicron and big omega and big theta. SIGACT News , 8(2):18–23, 1976.
[266]  Donald E. Knuth. Stable Marriage and Its Relation to Other Combinatorial Pr oblems: An
Intr oduction to the Mathematical Analysis of Algorithms , volume 10 of CRM Pr oceedings and
Lectur e Notes . American Mathematical Society , 1997.
[267]  Donald E. Knuth, James H. Morris, Jr ., and V aughan R. Pratt. Fast pattern matching in strings.
SIAM Journal on Computing , 6(2):323–350, 1977.
[268]  Mykel J. Kochenderfer and T im A. Wheeler . Algorithms for Optimization . The MIT Press,
2019.
Page number: 1442
[269]  J. Komlós. Linear verification for spanning trees. Combinatorica , 5(1):57–65, 1985.
[270]  Dexter C. Kozen. The Design and Analysis of Algorithms . Springer , 1992.
[271]  David W . Krumme, Geor ge Cybenko, and K. N. V enkataraman. Gossiping in minimal time.
SIAM Journal on Computing , 21(1):1 1 1–139, 1992.
[272]  Joseph B. Kruskal, Jr . On the shortest spanning subtree of a graph and the traveling salesman
problem. Pr oceedings of the American Mathematical Society , 7(1):48–50, 1956.
[273]  Harold W . Kuhn. The Hungarian method for the assignment problem. Naval Resear ch
Logistics Quarterly , 2:83–97, 1955.
[274]  W illiam Kuszmaul and Charles E. Leiserson. Floors and ceilings in divide-and-conquer
recurrences. In Pr oceedings of the 3r d SIAM Symposium on Simplicity in Algorithms , pages
133–141, 2021.
[275]  Leslie Lamport. How to make a multiprocessor computer that correctly executes multiprocess
programs. IEEE T ransactions on Computers , C-28(9):690–691, 1979.
[276]  Eugene L. Lawler . Combinatorial Optimization: Networks and Matr oids . Holt, Rinehart, and
W inston, 1976.
[277]  Eugene L. Lawler , J. K. Lenstra, A. H. G. Rinnooy Kan, and D. B. Shmoys, editors. The
T raveling Salesman Pr oblem . John W iley & Sons, 1985.
[278]  François Le Gall. Powers of tensors and fast matrix multiplication. In Pr oceedings of the 2014
International Symposium on Symbolic and Algebraic Computation, (ISSAC) , pages 296–303,
2014.
[279]  Doug Lea. A Java fork/join framework. In ACM 2000 Confer ence on Java Grande , pages 36–
43, 2000.
[280]  C. Y . Lee. An algorithm for path connection and its applications. IRE T ransactions on
Electr onic Computers , EC-10(3):346–365, 1961.
[281]  Edward A. Lee. The problem with threads. IEEE Computer , 39(3):33–42, 2006.
[282]  I-T ing Angelina Lee, Charles E. Leiserson, T ao B. Schardl, Zhunping Zhang, and Jim Sukha.
On-the-fly pipeline parallelism. ACM T ransactions on Parallel Computing , 2(3):17:1–17:42,
2015.
[283]  I-T ing Angelina Lee and T ao B. Schardl. Ef ficient race detection for reducer hyperobjects.
ACM T ransactions on Parallel Computing , 4(4):1–40, 2018.
[284]  Mun-Kyu Lee, Pierre Michaud, Jeong Seop Sim, and Daehun Nyang. A simple proof of
optimality for the MIN cache replacement policy . Information Pr ocessing Letters , 1 16(2):168–
170, 2016.
[285]  Y in T at Lee and Aaron Sidford. Path finding methods for linear programming: Solving linear
programs in 
  iterations and faster algorithms for maximum flow . In Pr oceedings of
the 55th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science , pages 424–433, 2014.
[286]  T om Leighton. T ight bounds on the complexity of parallel sorting. IEEE T ransactions on
Computers , C-34(4):344–354, 1985.
[287]  T om Leighton. Notes on better master theorems for divide-and-conquer recurrences. Class
notes. A vailable at http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?doi=10.1.1.39.1636 , 1996.
Page number: 1443
[288]  T om Leighton and Satish Rao. Multicommodity max-flow min-cut theorems and their use in
designing approximation algorithms. Journal of the ACM , 46(6):787–832, 1999.
[289]  Daan Leijen and Judd Hall. Optimize managed code for multi-core machines. MSDN
Magazine , 2007.
[290]  Charles E. Leiserson. The Cilk++ concurrency platform. Journal of Super computing ,
51(3):244–257, March 2010.
[291]  Charles E. Leiserson. Cilk. In David Padua, editor , Encyclopedia of Parallel Computing , pages
273–288. Springer , 201 1.
[292]  Charles E. Leiserson, T ao B. Schardl, and Jim Sukha. Deterministic parallel random-number
generation for dynamic-multithreading platforms. In Pr oceddings of the 17th ACM SIGPLAN
Symposium on Principles and Practice of Parallel Pr ogramming (PPoPP) , pages 193–204,
2012.
[293]  Charles E. Leiserson, Neil C. Thompson, Joel S. Emer , Bradley C. Kuszmaul, Butler W .
Lampson, Daniel Sanchez, and T ao B. Schardl. There’ s plenty of room at the T op: What will
drive computer performance after Moore’ s law? Science , 368(6495), 2020.
[294]  Debra A. Lelewer and Daniel S. Hirschber g. Data compression. ACM Computing Surveys ,
19(3):261–296, 1987.
[295]  A. K. Lenstra, H. W . Lenstra, Jr ., M. S. Manasse, and J. M. Pollard. The number field sieve. In
A. K. Lenstra and H. W . Lenstra, Jr ., editors, The Development of the Number Field Sieve ,
volume 1554 of Lectur e Notes in Mathematics , pages 1 1–42. Springer , 1993.
[296]  H. W . Lenstra, Jr . Factoring integers with elliptic curves. Annals of Mathematics , 126(3):649–
673, 1987.
[297]  L. A. Levin. Universal sequential search problems. Pr oblems of Information T ransmission ,
9(3):265–266, 1973. T ranslated from the original Russian article in Pr oblemy Per edachi
Informatsii  9(3): 1 15–1 16, 1973.
[298]  Anany Levitin. Intr oduction to the Design & Analysis of Algorithms . Addison-W esley , third
edition, 201 1.
[299]  Harry R. Lewis and Christos H. Papadimitriou. Elements of the Theory of Computation .
Prentice Hall, second edition, 1998.
[300]  Nick Littlestone. Learning quickly when irrelevant attributes abound: A new linear -threshold
algorithm. Machine Learning , 2(4):285–318, 1988.
[301]  Nick Littlestone and Manfred K. W armuth. The weighted majority algorithm. Information and
Computation , 108(2):212–261, 1994.
[302]  C. L. Liu. Intr oduction to Combinatorial Mathematics . McGraw-Hill, 1968.
[303]  Y ang P . Liu and Aaron Sidford. Faster ener gy maximization for faster maximum flow . In
Pr oceedings of the 52nd Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing , pages 803–814,
2020.
[304]  S. P . Lloyd. Least squares quantization in PCM. IEEE T ransactions on Information Theory ,
28(2):129–137, 1982.
[305]  Panos Louridas. Real-W orld Algorithms: A Beginner ’ s Guide . The MIT Press, 2017.
[306]  László Lovász and Michael D. Plummer . Matching Theory , volume 121 of Annals of Discr ete
Mathematics . North Holland, 1986.
Page number: 1444
[307]  John MacCormick. 9 Algorithms That Changed the Futur e: The Ingenious Ideas That Drive
T oday’ s Computers . Princeton University Press, 2012.
[308]  Aleksander Madry . Navigating central path with electrical flows: From flows to matchings,
and back. In Pr oceedings of the 54th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science ,
pages 253–262, 2013.
[309]  Bruce M. Maggs and Ser ge A. Plotkin. Minimum-cost spanning tree as a path-finding
problem. Information Pr ocessing Letters , 26(6):291–293, 1988.
[310]  M. Mahajan, P . Nimbhorkar , and K. V aradarajan. The planar k -means problem is NP-hard. In
S. Das and R. Uehara, editors, W ALCOM 2009: Algorithms and Computation , volume 5431 of
Lectur e Notes in Computer Science , pages 274–285. Springer , 2009.
[31 1]  Michael Main. Data Structur es and Other Objects Using Java . Addison-W esley , 1999.
[312]  Udi Manber and Gene Myers. Suf fix arrays: A new method for on-line string searches. SIAM
Journal on Computing , 22(5):935–948, 1993.
[313]  David F . Manlove. Algorithmics of Matching Under Pr efer ences , volume 2 of Series on
Theor etical Computer Science . W orld Scientific, 2013.
[314]  Giovanni Manzini. An analysis of the Burrows-Wheeler transform. Journal of the ACM ,
48(3):407–430, 2001.
[315]  Mario Andrea Marchisio, editor . Computational Methods in Synthetic Biology . Humana Press,
2015.
[316]  W illiam J. Masek and Michael S. Paterson. A faster algorithm computing string edit distances.
Journal of Computer and System Sciences , 20(1):18–31, 1980.
[317]  Y u. V . Matiyasevich. Real-time recognition of the inclusion relation. Journal of Soviet
Mathematics , 1(1):64–70, 1973. T ranslated from the original Russian article in Zapiski
Nauchnykh Seminar ov Leningradskogo Otdeleniya Matematicheskogo Institute im. V . A.
Steklova Akademii Nauk SSSR  20: 104–1 14, 1971.
[318]  H. A. Maurer , Th. Ottmann, and H.-W . Six. Implementing dictionaries using binary trees of
very small height. Information Pr ocessing Letters , 5(1):1 1–14, 1976.
[319]  Ernst W . Mayr , Hans Jür gen Prömel, and Angelika Steger , editors. Lectur es on Pr oof
V erification and Appr oximation Algorithms , volume 1367 of Lectur e Notes in Computer
Science . Springer , 1998.
[320]  Catherine C. McGeoch. All pairs shortest paths and the essential subgraph. Algorithmica ,
13(5):426–441, 1995.
[321]  Catherine C. McGeoch. A Guide to Experimental Algorithmics . Cambridge University Press,
2012.
[322]  Andrew McGregor . Graph stream algorithms: A survey . SIGMOD Recor d , 43(1):9–20, 2014.
[323]  M. D. McIlroy . A killer adversary for quicksort. Softwar e—Practice and Experience ,
29(4):341–344, 1999.
[324]  Kurt Mehlhorn and Stefan Näher . LEDA: A Platform for Combinatorial and Geometric
Computing . Cambridge University Press, 1999.
[325]  Kurt Mehlhorn and Peter Sanders. Algorithms and Data Structur es: The Basic T oolbox .
Springer , 2008.
Page number: 1445
[326]  Dinesh P . Mehta and Sartaj Sahni. Handbook of Data Structur es and Applications . Chapman
and Hall/CRC, second edition, 2018.
[327]  Gary L. Miller . Riemann’ s hypothesis and tests for primality . Journal of Computer and System
Sciences , 13(3):300–317, 1976.
[328]  Marvin Minsky and Seymore A. Pappert. Per ceptr ons . The MIT Press, 1969.
[329]  John C. Mitchell. Foundations for Pr ogramming Languages . The MIT Press, 1996.
[330]  Joseph S. B. Mitchell. Guillotine subdivisions approximate polygonal subdivisions: A simple
polynomial-time approximation scheme for geometric TSP , k -MST , and related problems.
SIAM Journal on Computing , 28(4):1298–1309, 1999.
[331]  Michael Mitzenmacher and Eli Upfal. Pr obability and Computing . Cambridge University
Press, second edition, 2017.
[332]  Louis Monier . Algorithmes de Factorisation D’Entiers . PhD thesis, L ’Université Paris-Sud,
1980.
[333]  Louis Monier . Evaluation and comparison of two ef ficient probabilistic primality testing
algorithms. Theor etical Computer Science , 12(1):97–108, 1980.
[334]  Edward F . Moore. The shortest path through a maze. In Pr oceedings of the International
Symposium on the Theory of Switching , pages 285–292. Harvard University Press, 1959.
[335]  Rajeev Motwani, Joseph (Sef fi) Naor , and Prabhakar Raghavan. Randomized approximation
algorithms in combinatorial optimization. In Dorit Hochbaum, editor , Appr oximation
Algorithms for NP-Har d Pr oblems , chapter 1 1 , pages 447–481. PWS Publishing Company ,
1997.
[336]  Rajeev Motwani and Prabhakar Raghavan. Randomized Algorithms . Cambridge University
Press, 1995.
[337]  James Munkres. Algorithms for the assignment and transportation problems. Journal of the
Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics , 5(1):32–38, 1957.
[338]  J. I. Munro and V . Raman. Fast stable in-place sorting with O ( n ) data moves. Algorithmica ,
16(2):151–160, 1996.
[339]  Y oichi Muraoka and David J. Kuck. On the time required for a sequence of matrix products.
Communications of the ACM , 16(1):22–26, 1973.
[340]  Kevin P . Murphy . Machine Learning: A Pr obabilistic Perspective . MIT Press, 2012.
[341]  S. Muthukrishnan. Data streams: Algorithms and applications. Foundations and T r ends in
Theor etical Computer Science , 1(2), 2005.
[342]  Richard Neapolitan. Foundations of Algorithms . Jones & Bartlett Learning, fifth edition, 2014.
[343]  Y urii Nesterov . Intr oductory Lectur es on Convex Optimization: A Basic Course , volume 87 of
Applied Optimization . Springer , 2004.
[344]  J. Niever gelt and E. M. Reingold. Binary search trees of bounded balance. SIAM Journal on
Computing , 2(1):33–43, 1973.
[345]  Ivan Niven and Herbert S. Zuckerman. An Intr oduction to the Theory of Numbers . John W iley
& Sons, fourth edition, 1980.
[346]  National Institute of Standards and T echnology . Hash functions.
https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/hash-functions , 2019.
Page number: 1446
[347]  Alan V . Oppenheim and Ronald W . Schafer , with John R. Buck. Discr ete-T ime Signal
Pr ocessing . Prentice Hall, second edition, 1998.
[348]  Alan V . Oppenheim and Alan S. W illsky , with S. Hamid Nawab. Signals and Systems . Prentice
Hall, second edition, 1997.
[349]  James B. Orlin. A polynomial time primal network simplex algorithm for minimum cost
flows. Mathematical Pr ogramming , 78(1):109–129, 1997.
[350]  James B. Orlin. Max flows in O ( nm ) time, or better . In Pr oceedings of the 45th Annual ACM
Symposium on Theory of Computing , pages 765–774, 2013.
[351]  Anna Pagh, Rasmus Pagh, and Milan Ruzic. Linear probing with constant independence.
https://arxiv .or g/abs/cs/0612055 , 2006.
[352]  Christos H. Papadimitriou. Computational Complexity . Addison-W esley , 1994.
[353]  Christos H. Papadimitriou and Kenneth Steiglitz. Combinatorial Optimization: Algorithms and
Complexity . Prentice Hall, 1982.
[354]  Michael S. Paterson. Progress in selection. In Pr oceedings of the Fifth Scandinavian W orkshop
on Algorithm Theory , pages 368–379, 1996.
[355]  Seth Pettie. A new approach to all-pairs shortest paths on real-weighted graphs. Theor etical
Computer Science , 312(1):47–74, 2004.
[356]  Seth Pettie and V ijaya Ramachandran. An optimal minimum spanning tree algorithm. Journal
of the ACM , 49(1):16–34, 2002.
[357]  Seth Pettie and V ijaya Ramachandran. A shortest path algorithm for real-weighted undirected
graphs. SIAM Journal on Computing , 34(6):1398–1431, 2005.
[358]  Steven Phillips and Jef fery W estbrook. Online load balancing and network flow . Algorithmica ,
21(3):245–261, 1998.
[359]  Ser ge A. Plotkin, David. B. Shmoys, and Éva T ardos. Fast approximation algorithms for
fractional packing and covering problems. Mathematics of Operations Resear ch , 20:257–301,
1995.
[360]  J. M. Pollard. Factoring with cubic integers. In A. K. Lenstra and H. W . Lenstra, Jr ., editors,
The Development of the Number Field Sieve , volume 1554 of Lectur e Notes in Mathematics ,
pages 4–10. Springer , 1993.
[361]  Carl Pomerance. On the distribution of pseudoprimes. Mathematics of Computation ,
37(156):587–593, 1981.
[362]  Carl Pomerance, editor . Pr oceedings of the AMS Symposia in Applied Mathematics:
Computational Number Theory and Cryptography . American Mathematical Society , 1990.
[363]  W illiam K. Pratt. Digital Image Pr ocessing . John W iley & Sons, fourth edition, 2007.
[364]  Franco P . Preparata and Michael Ian Shamos. Computational Geometry: An Intr oduction .
Springer , 1985.
[365]  W illiam H. Press, Saul A. T eukolsky , W illiam T . V etterling, and Brian P . Flannery . Numerical
Recipes in C++: The Art of Scientific Computing . Cambridge University Press, second edition,
2002.
[366]  W illiam H. Press, Saul A. T eukolsky , W illiam T . V etterling, and Brian P . Flannery . Numerical
Recipes: The Art of Scientific Computing . Cambridge University Press, third edition, 2007.
Page number: 1447
[367]  R. C. Prim. Shortest connection networks and some generalizations. Bell System T echnical
Journal , 36(6):1389–1401, 1957.
[368]  Robert L. Probert. On the additive complexity of matrix multiplication. SIAM Journal on
Computing , 5(2):187–203, 1976.
[369]  W illiam Pugh. Skip lists: A probabilistic alternative to balanced trees. Communications of the
ACM , 33(6):668–676, 1990.
[370]  Simon J. Puglisi, W . F . Smyth, and Andrew H. T urpin. A taxonomy of suf fix array
construction algorithms. ACM Computing Surveys , 39(2), 2007.
[371]  Paul W . Purdom, Jr . and Cynthia A. Brown. The Analysis of Algorithms . Holt, Rinehart, and
W inston, 1985.
[372]  Michael O. Rabin. Probabilistic algorithms. In J. F . T raub, editor , Algorithms and Complexity:
New Dir ections and Recent Results , pages 21–39. Academic Press, 1976.
[373]  Michael O. Rabin. Probabilistic algorithm for testing primality . Journal of Number Theory ,
12(1):128–138, 1980.
[374]  P . Raghavan and C. D. Thompson. Randomized rounding: A technique for provably good
algorithms and algorithmic proofs. Combinatorica , 7(4):365–374, 1987.
[375]  Rajeev Raman. Recent results on the single-source shortest paths problem. SIGACT News ,
28(2):81–87, 1997.
[376]  James Reinders. Intel Thr eading Building Blocks: Outfitting C++ for Multi-cor e Pr ocessor
Parallelism . O’Reilly Media, Inc., 2007.
[377]  Edward M. Reingold, Kenneth J. Urban, and David Gries. K-M-P string matching revisited.
Information Pr ocessing Letters , 64(5):217–223, 1997.
[378]  Hans Riesel. Prime Numbers and Computer Methods for Factorization , volume 126 of
Pr ogr ess in Mathematics . Birkhäuser , second edition, 1994.
[379]  Ronald L. Rivest, M. J. B. Robshaw , R. Sidney , and Y . L. Y in. The RC6 block cipher . In First
Advanced Encryption Standar d (AES) Confer ence , 1998.
[380]  Ronald L. Rivest, Adi Shamir , and Leonard M. Adleman. A method for obtaining digital
signatures and public-key cryptosystems. Communications of the ACM , 21(2):120–126, 1978.
See also U.S. Patent 4,405,829.
[381]  Herbert Robbins. A remark on Stirling’ s formula. American Mathematical Monthly , 62(1):26–
29, 1955.
[382]  Julia Robinson. An iterative method of solving a game. The Annals of Mathematics ,
54(2):296–301, 1951.
[383]  Arch D. Robison and Charles E. Leiserson. Cilk Plus. In Pavan Balaji, editor , Pr ogramming
Models for Parallel Computing , chapter 13 , pages 323–352. The MIT Press, 2015.
[384]  D. J. Rosenkrantz, R. E. Stearns, and P . M. Lewis. An analysis of several heuristics for the
traveling salesman problem. SIAM Journal on Computing , 6(3):563–581, 1977.
[385]  T im Roughgarden. Algorithms Illuminated, Part 1: The Basics . Soundlikeyourself Publishing,
2017.
[386]  T im Roughgarden. Algorithms Illuminated, Part 2: Graph Algorithms and Data Structur es .
Soundlikeyourself Publishing, 2018.
Page number: 1448
[387]  T im Roughgarden. Algorithms Illuminated, Part 3: Gr eedy Algorithms and Dynamic
Pr ogramming . Soundlikeyourself Publishing, 2019.
[388]  T im Roughgarden. Algorithms Illuminated, Part 4: Algorithms for NP-Har d Pr oblems .
Soundlikeyourself Publishing, 2020.
[389]  Salvador Roura. Improved master theorems for divide-and-conquer recurrences. Journal of the
ACM , 48(2):170–205, 2001.
[390]  Y . A. Rozanov . Pr obability Theory: A Concise Course . Dover , 1969.
[391]  Stuart Russell and Peter Norvig. Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Appr oach . Pearson, fourth
edition, 2020.
[392]  S. Sahni and T . Gonzalez. P-complete approximation problems. Journal of the ACM ,
23(3):555–565, 1976.
[393]  Peter Sanders, Kurt Mehlhorn, Martin Dietzfelbinger , and Roman Dementiev . Sequential and
Parallel Algorithms and Data Structur es: The Basic T oolkit . Springer , 2019.
[394]  Piotr Sankowski. Shortest paths in matrix multiplication time. In Pr oceedings of the 13th
Annual Eur opean Symposium on Algorithms , pages 770–778, 2005.
[395]  Russel Schaf fer and Robert Sedgewick. The analysis of heapsort. Journal of Algorithms ,
15(1):76–100, 1993.
[396]  T ao B. Schardl, I-T ing Angelina Lee, and Charles E. Leiserson. Brief announcement: Open
Cilk. In Pr oceedings of the 30th Annual ACM Symposium on Parallelism in Algorithms and
Ar chitectur es , pages 351–353, 2018.
[397]  A. Schönhage, M. Paterson, and N. Pippenger . Finding the median. Journal of Computer and
System Sciences , 13(2):184–199, 1976.
[398]  Alexander Schrijver . Theory of Linear and Integer Pr ogramming . John W iley & Sons, 1986.
[399]  Alexander Schrijver . Paths and flows—A historical survey . CWI Quarterly , 6(3):169–183,
1993.
[400]  Alexander Schrijver . On the history of the shortest paths problem. Documenta Mathematica ,
17(1):155–167, 2012.
[401]  Robert Sedgewick. Implementing quicksort programs. Communications of the ACM ,
21(10):847–857, 1978.
[402]  Robert Sedgewick and Kevin W ayne. Algorithms . Addison-W esley , fourth edition, 201 1.
[403]  Raimund Seidel. On the all-pairs-shortest-path problem in unweighted undirected graphs.
Journal of Computer and System Sciences , 51(3):400–403, 1995.
[404]  Raimund Seidel and C. R. Aragon. Randomized search trees. Algorithmica , 16(4–5):464–497,
1996.
[405]  João Setubal and João Meidanis. Intr oduction to Computational Molecular Biology . PWS
Publishing Company , 1997.
[406]  Clif ford A. Shaf fer . A Practical Intr oduction to Data Structur es and Algorithm Analysis .
Prentice Hall, second edition, 2001.
[407]  Jef frey Shallit. Origins of the analysis of the Euclidean algorithm. Historia Mathematica ,
21(4):401–419, 1994.
Page number: 1449
[408]  M. Sharir . A strong-connectivity algorithm and its applications in data flow analysis.
Computers and Mathematics with Applications , 7(1):67–72, 1981.
[409]  David B. Shmoys. Computing near -optimal solutions to combinatorial optimization problems.
In W illiam Cook, László Lovász, and Paul Seymour , editors, Combinatorial Optimization ,
volume 20 of DIMACS Series in Discr ete Mathematics and Theor etical Computer Science .
American Mathematical Society , 1995.
[410]  A vi Shoshan and Uri Zwick. All pairs shortest paths in undirected graphs with integer weights.
In Pr oceedings of the 40th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science , pages
605–614, 1999.
[41 1]  V ictor Shoup. A Computational Intr oduction to Number Theory and Algebra . Cambridge
University Press, second edition, 2009.
[412]  Julian Shun. Shar ed-Memory Parallelism Can Be Simple, Fast, and Scalable . Association for
Computing Machinery and Mor gan & Claypool, 2017.
[413]  Michael Sipser . Intr oduction to the Theory of Computation . Cengage Learning, third edition,
2013.
[414]  Steven S. Skiena. The Algorithm Design Manual . Springer , second edition, corrected printing,
2012.
[415]  Daniel D. Sleator and Robert E. T arjan. A data structure for dynamic trees. Journal of
Computer and System Sciences , 26(3):362–391, 1983.
[416]  Daniel D. Sleator and Robert E. T arjan. Amortized ef ficiency of list update rules. In
Pr oceedings of the Sixteenth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing , pages 488–
492, 1984.
[417]  Daniel D. Sleator and Robert E. T arjan. Amortized ef ficiency of list update and paging rules.
Communications of the ACM , 28(2):202–208, 1985.
[418]  Daniel D. Sleator and Robert E. T arjan. Self-adjusting binary search trees. Journal of the
ACM , 32(3):652–686, 1985.
[419]  Michael Soltys-Kulinicz. An Intr oduction to the Analysis of Algorithms . W orld Scientific, third
edition, 2018.
[420]  Joel Spencer . T en Lectur es on the Pr obabilistic Method , volume 64 of CBMS-NSF Regional
Confer ence Series in Applied Mathematics . Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics,
1993.
[421]  Daniel A. Spielman and Shang-Hua T eng. Smoothed analysis of algorithms: Why the simplex
algorithm usually takes polynomial time. Journal of the ACM , 51(3):385–463, 2004.
[422]  Gilbert Strang. Intr oduction to Applied Mathematics . W ellesley-Cambridge Press, 1986.
[423]  Gilbert Strang. Linear Algebra and Its Applications . Thomson Brooks/Cole, fourth edition,
2006.
[424]  V olker Strassen. Gaussian elimination is not optimal. Numerische Mathematik , 14(3):354–356,
1969.
[425]  T . G. Szymanski. A special case of the maximal common subsequence problem. T echnical
Report TR-170, Computer Science Laboratory , Princeton University , 1975.
[426]  Robert E. T arjan. Depth first search and linear graph algorithms. SIAM Journal on Computing ,
1(2):146–160, 1972.
Page number: 1450
[427]  Robert E. T arjan. Ef ficiency of a good but not linear set union algorithm. Journal of the ACM ,
22(2):215–225, 1975.
[428]  Robert E. T arjan. A class of algorithms which require nonlinear time to maintain disjoint sets.
Journal of Computer and System Sciences , 18(2):1 10–127, 1979.
[429]  Robert E. T arjan. Data Structur es and Network Algorithms . Society for Industrial and Applied
Mathematics, 1983.
[430]  Robert E. T arjan. Amortized computational complexity . SIAM Journal on Algebraic and
Discr ete Methods , 6(2):306–318, 1985.
[431]  Robert E. T arjan. Class notes: Disjoint set union. COS 423, Princeton University , 1999.
A vailable at https://www .cs.princeton.edu/courses/archive/spr00/cs423/handout3.pdf .
[432]  Robert E. T arjan and Jan van Leeuwen. W orst-case analysis of set union algorithms. Journal of
the ACM , 31(2):245–281, 1984.
[433]  Geor ge B. Thomas, Jr ., Maurice D. W eir , Joel Hass, and Frank R. Giordano. Thomas’
Calculus . Addison-W esley , eleventh edition, 2005.
[434]  Mikkel Thorup. Faster deterministic sorting and priority queues in linear space. In
Pr oceedings of the 9th ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discr ete Algorithms , pages 550–555, 1998.
[435]  Mikkel Thorup. Undirected single-source shortest paths with positive integer weights in linear
time. Journal of the ACM , 46(3):362–394, 1999.
[436]  Mikkel Thorup. On RAM priority queues. SIAM Journal on Computing , 30(1):86–109, 2000.
[437]  Mikkel Thorup. High speed hashing for integers and strings. http://arxiv .or g/abs/1504.06804 ,
2015.
[438]  Mikkel Thorup. Linear probing with 5-independent hashing. http://arxiv .or g/abs/1509.04549 ,
2015.
[439]  Richard T olimieri, Myoung An, and Chao Lu. Mathematics of Multidimensional Fourier
T ransform Algorithms . Springer , second edition, 1997.
[440]  P . van Emde Boas. Preserving order in a forest in less than logarithmic time and linear space.
Information Pr ocessing Letters , 6(3):80–82, 1977.
[441]  P . van Emde Boas, R. Kaas, and E. Zijlstra. Design and implementation of an ef ficient priority
queue. Mathematical Systems Theory , 10(1):99–127, 1976.
[442]  Charles V an Loan. Computational Frameworks for the Fast Fourier T ransform . Society for
Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 1992.
[443]  Benjamin V an Roy . A short proof of optimality for the MIN cache replacement algorithm.
Information Pr ocessing Letters , 102(2–3):72–73, 2007.
[444]  Robert J. V anderbei. Linear Pr ogramming: Foundations and Extensions . Kluwer Academic
Publishers, 1996.
[445]  V ir ginia V assilevska W illiams. Multiplying matrices faster than Coppersmith-W inograd. In
Pr oceedings of the 44th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing , pages 887–898,
2012.
[446]  V ijay V . V azirani. Appr oximation Algorithms . Springer , 2001.
[447]  Rakesh M. V erma. General techniques for analyzing recursive algorithms with applications.
SIAM Journal on Computing , 26(2):568–581, 1997.
Page number: 1451
[448]  Berthold Vöcking, Helmut Alt, Martin Dietzfelbinger , Rüdiger Reischuk, Christian Scheideler ,
Heribert V ollmer , and Dorothea W ager , editors. Algorithms Unplugged . Springer , 201 1.
[449]  Antony F . W are. Fast approximate Fourier transforms for irregularly spaced data. SIAM
Review , 40(4):838–856, 1998.
[450]  Stephen W arshall. A theorem on boolean matrices. Journal of the ACM , 9(1):1 1–12, 1962.
[451]  Mark Allen W eiss. Data Structur es and Pr oblem Solving Using C++ . Addison-W esley , second
edition, 2000.
[452]  Mark Allen W eiss. Data Structur es and Pr oblem Solving Using Java . Addison-W esley , third
edition, 2006.
[453]  Mark Allen W eiss. Data Structur es and Algorithm Analysis in C++ . Addison-W esley , third
edition, 2007.
[454]  Mark Allen W eiss. Data Structur es and Algorithm Analysis in Java . Addison-W esley , second
edition, 2007.
[455]  Herbert S. W ilf. Algorithms and Complexity . A K Peters, second edition, 2002.
[456]  J. W . J. W illiams. Algorithm 232 (HEAPSOR T). Communications of the ACM , 7(6):347–348,
1964.
[457]  R yan W illiams. Faster all-pairs shortest paths via circuit complexity . SIAM Journal on
Computing , 47(5):1965–1985, 2018.
[458]  David P . W illiamson. Network Flow Algorithms . Cambridge University Press, 2019.
[459]  David P . W illiamson and David B. Shmoys. The Design of Appr oximation Algorithms .
Cambridge University Press, 201 1.
[460]  Shmuel W inograd. On the algebraic complexity of functions. In Actes du Congrès
International des Mathématiciens , volume 3, pages 283–288, 1970.
[461]  Y ifan Xu, I-T ing Angelina Lee, and Kunal Agrawal. Ef ficient parallel determinacy race
detection for two-dimensional dags. In Pr oceedings of the 23r d ACM SIGPLAN Symposium on
Principles and Practice of Parallel Pr ogramming (PPoPP) , pages 368–380, 2018.
[462]  Chee Y ap. A real elementary approach to the master recurrence and generalizations. In M.
Ogihara and J. T arui, editors, Theory and Applications of Models of Computation. T AMC 201 1 ,
volume 6648 of Lectur e Notes in Computer Science , pages 14–26. Springer , 201 1.
[463]  Y inyu Y e. Interior Point Algorithms: Theory and Analysis . John W iley & Sons, 1997.
[464]  Neal E. Y oung. Online paging and caching. In Encyclopedia of Algorithms , pages 1457–1461.
Springer , 2016.
[465]  Raphael Y uster and Uri Zwick. Answering distance queries in directed graphs using fast
matrix multiplication. In Pr oceedings of the 46th Annual Symposium on Foundations of
Computer Science , pages 389–396, 2005.
[466]  Jisheng Zhao and V ivek Sarkar . The design and implementation of the Habanero-Java parallel
programming language. In Symposium on Object-Oriented Pr ogramming, Systems, Languages
and Applications (OOPSLA) , pages 185–186, 201 1.
[467]  Uri Zwick. All pairs shortest paths using bridging sets and rectangular matrix multiplication.
Journal of the ACM , 49(3):289–317, 2002.
Page number: 1452
[468]  Daniel Zwillinger , editor . CRC Standar d Mathematical T ables and Formulae . Chapman &
Hall/CRC Press, 31st edition, 2003.
Page number: 1453
Index
This index uses the following conventions. Numbers are alphabetized as if
spelled out; for example, “2-3-4 tree” is indexed as if it were “two-three-
four tree.” When an entry refers to a place other than the main text, the page
number is followed by a tag: ex. for exercise, pr . for problem, fig. for
figure, and n. for footnote. A tagged page number often indicates the first
page of an exercise or problem, which is not necessarily the page on which
the reference actually appears.
α ( n ), 533
α -strongly convex function, 1041
β -smooth function, 1041
δ
(shortest-path distance), 558
(shortest-path weight), 604
ϕ (golden ratio), 69
 (conjugate of the golden ratio), 69
ϕ ( n ) (Euler ’ s phi function), 920
π
(predecessor in a breadth-first tree), 555
(predecessor in a shortest-paths tree), 608
ρ ( n )-approximation algorithm, 1 104 ,  1 120
o -notation, 60
O -notation, 50 ,  54 – 55
O ′-notation, 73  pr .
-notation, 73  pr .
ω -notation, 61
Ω-notation, 51 ,  54  fig.,  55 – 56
-notation, 73  pr .
-notation, 73  pr .
Θ-notation, 33 ,  51 ,  54  fig.,  56
-notation, 73  pr .
{ } (set), 1 153
∈  (set member), 1 153
Page number: 1454
∉  (not a set member), 1 153
∅
(empty language), 1052
(empty set), 1 153
⊆  (subset), 1 154
⊂  (proper subset), 1 154
: (such that), 54  n.,  1 154
∩ (set intersection), 1 154
∪  (set union), 1 154
− (set dif ference), 1 154
| |
(flow value), 672
(length of a string), 959
(set cardinality), 1 156
× (Cartesian product), 1 157
〈  〉
(sequence), 1 162
(standard encoding), 1052
: (subarray), 19 ,  23
[ a , b ] (closed interval), 1 157
( a , b ) (open interval), 1 157
[ a , b ) or ( a , b ] (half-open interval), 1 157
 (choose), 1 180
∥  ∥  (euclidean norm), 1219
! (factorial), 67 – 68
⌈  ⌉  (ceiling), 63
⌊  ⌋  (floor), 63
∂ (partial derivative), 1023
∑ (sum), 1 140
∏ (product), 1 144
→ (adjacency relation), 1 165
↝  (reachability relation), 1 165
∧  (AND), 659 ,  1065
∥  (concatenation), 291
¬ (NOT), 1065
∨  (OR), 659 ,  1065
⋘  (left shift), 305
⋙  (logical right shift), 285
⊕
(group operator), 917
(semiring operator), 651  n.
(symmetric dif ference), 706
⊗
(convolution operator), 880
(semiring operator), 651  n.
* (closure operator), 1052
| (divides relation), 904
∤  (does-not-divide relation), 904
= (mod n ) (equivalent, modulo n ), 64
Page number: 1455
≠ (mod n ) (not equivalent, modulo n ), 64
[ a ] n  (equivalence class modulo n ), 905
+ n  (addition modulo n ), 917
· n  (multiplication modulo n ), 917
 (Legendre symbol), 954  pr .
ε  (empty string), 959 ,  1052
⊏  (prefix relation), 959
⊐  (suf fix relation), 959
//  (comment symbol), 22
≫  (much-greater -than relation), 533
≪  (much-less-than relation), 761
≤ P  (polynomial-time reducibility relation), 1062 ,  1071  ex.
AA-tree, 358
abelian group, 917
absent child, 1 173
absolutely conver gent series, 1 140
absorption laws for sets, 1 155
abstract problem, 1048
abuse of asymptotic notation, 55 ,  59 – 60
acceptable pair of integers, 950
acceptance
by an algorithm, 1053
by a finite automaton, 968
accepting state, 967
accounting method, 453 – 456
for binary counters, 455
for dynamic tables, 463
for stack operations, 454 – 455
Ackermann’ s function, 544
activity-selection problem, 418 – 425
acyclic graph, 1 166
A DD -B INAR Y -I NTEGERS , 25  ex.
add instruction, 26
addition
of matrices, 1217
modulo n  (+ n ), 917
of polynomials, 877
additive group modulo n , 918
addressing, open, see  open-address hash table
A DD -S UBARRA Y , 783  pr .
adjacency-list representation, 550 – 551
replaced by a hash table, 553  ex.
adjacency-matrix representation, 551 – 552
adjacency relation (→), 1 165
adjacent vertices, 1 165
Advanced Encryption Standard (AES), 291
adversary , 204 ,  286 ,  805 ,  807 ,  941
Page number: 1456
AES, 291
aggregate analysis, 449 – 453
for binary counters, 451 – 453
for breadth-first search, 558
for depth-first search, 566 – 567
for Dijkstra’ s algorithm, 623 – 624
for disjoint-set data structures, 525 – 526 ,  527  ex.
for dynamic tables, 462 – 463
for the Knuth-Morris-Pratt algorithm, 977 – 978
for Prim’ s algorithm, 597
for rod cutting, 370
for shortest paths in a dag, 617
for stack operations, 449 – 451
aggregate flow , 864
Akra-Bazzi recurrence, 1 15 – 1 19
solving by Akra-Bazzi method, 1 17 – 1 18
algorithm, 1 – 1226
analysis of, 25 – 34
approximation, 1 104 – 1 136
compare-exchange, 222  pr .
correctness of, 6
decision, 1053
deterministic, 135
lookahead, 815  ex.
nondeterministic, 765
oblivious, 222  pr .
of fline, 791
online, see  online algorithm
origin of word, 48
parallel, see  parallel algorithm
push-relabel, 702
randomized, see  randomized algorithm
recursive, 34
reduction, 1046 ,  1062
running time of, 29
scaling, 641  pr .,  699  pr .
streaming, 818
as a technology , 13
verification, 1058
algorithmic recurrence, 77 – 78
A LLOCA TE -N ODE , 506
all-pairs shortest paths, 605 ,  646 – 669
in dynamic graphs, 669
in ϵ -dense graphs, 668  pr .
Floyd-W arshall algorithm for , 655 – 659
Johnson’ s algorithm for , 662 – 667
by matrix multiplication, 648 – 655 ,  668 – 669
by repeated squaring, 652 – 653
α -balanced, 472  pr .
α ( n ), 533
Page number: 1457
α -strongly convex function, 1041
alphabet, 967 ,  1052
alternating path, 705
amortized analysis, 448 – 475
by accounting method, 453 – 456
by aggregate analysis, 370 ,  449 – 453
for breadth-first search, 558
for depth-first search, 566 – 567
for Dijkstra’ s algorithm, 623 – 624
for disjoint-set data structures, 525 – 526 ,  527  ex.,  531  ex.,  534 – 540 ,  541  ex.
for dynamic tables, 460 – 471
for the Knuth-Morris-Pratt algorithm, 977 – 978
for making binary search dynamic, 472  pr .
by potential method, 456 – 460
for Prim’ s algorithm, 597
for restructuring red-black trees, 473  pr .
for shortest paths in a dag, 617
for stacks on secondary storage, 517  pr .
for weight-balanced trees, 472  pr .
amortized cost
in the accounting method, 453
in aggregate analysis, 449
in the potential method, 456
amortized progress, 1028
analysis of algorithms, 25 – 34
see also  amortized analysis, competitive analysis, probabilistic analysis
ancestor , 1 172
lowest common, 543  pr .
AND function ( ∧ ), 659 ,  1065
AND gate, 1065
and, in pseudocode, 24
antiparallel edges, 673 – 674
antisymmetric relation, 1 160
approximation
by least squares, 841 – 845
of summation by integrals, 1 150
approximation algorithm, 1 103 – 1 136
for bin packing, 1 131  pr .
for MAX-CNF satisfiability , 1 124  ex.
for maximum clique, 1 131  pr .
for maximum matching, 1 132  pr .
for maximum spanning tree, 1 134  pr .
for maximum-weight cut, 1 124  ex.
for MAX-3-CNF satisfiability , 1 120 – 1 121
for parallel machine scheduling, 1 133  pr .
randomized, 1 120
for set cover , 1 1 15 – 1 1 19
for subset sum, 1 124 – 1 130
for traveling-salesperson problem, 1 109 – 1 1 15
for vertex cover , 1 106 – 1 109 ,  1 121 – 1 124
Page number: 1458
for weighted set cover , 1 132  pr .
for 0-1 knapsack problem, 1 134  pr .
approximation error , 842
approximation ratio, 1 104 ,  1 120
approximation scheme, 1 105
A PPROX -M IN -W EIGHT -VC, 1 123
A PPROX -S UBSET -S UM , 1 128
A PPROX -TSP-T OUR , 1 1 1 1
A PPROX -V ER TEX -C OVER , 1 107
arbitrage, 641  pr .
arc, see  edge
ar gument of a function, 1 161 – 1 162
arithmetic instructions, 26
arithmetic, modular , 64 ,  916 – 923
arithmetic series, 1 141
arithmetic with infinities, 61 1
arm in a disk drive, 498
array
indexing into, 22 – 23 ,  26  n.,  252
inversion in, 47  pr .
Monge, 123  pr .
passing as a parameter , 24
in pseudocode, 22 – 23
storage of, 26  n.,  252
articulation point, 582  pr .
assignment
optimal, 723 – 739
satisfying, 1066 ,  1074
truth, 1066 ,  1073
assignment problem, 723 – 739
associative laws for sets, 1 155
associative operation, 917
asymptotically lar ger , 62
asymptotically nonnegative, 54
asymptotically positive, 54
asymptotically smaller , 62
asymptotically tight bound, 56
asymptotic lower bound, 55
asymptotic notation, 53 – 63 ,  72  pr .
and graph algorithms, 548
and linearity of summations, 1 141
asymptotic running time, 49
asymptotic upper bound, 54
attribute
in clustering, 1006
in a graph, 552
of an object, 23
augmentation of a flow , 678
augmented primal linear program, 870
augmenting data structures, 480 – 496
Page number: 1459
augmenting path, 681 – 682 ,  705
widest, 700  pr .
authentication, 309  pr .,  938 – 939 ,  942
automaton, 967 – 974
auxiliary hash function, 295
average-case running time, 32 ,  128
A VL tree, 357  pr .,  358
back edge, 569 ,  573
back substitution, 823
balanced search tree
AA-trees, 358
A VL trees, 357  pr .,  358
B-trees, 497 – 519
k -neighbor trees, 358
left-leaning red-black binary search trees, 358
red-black trees, 331 – 359
scapegoat trees, 358
splay trees, 359 ,  478
treaps, 358
2-3-4 trees, 502 ,  518  pr .
2-3 trees, 358 ,  519
weight-balanced trees, 358 ,  472  pr .
balls and bins, 143 – 144 ,  1212  pr .
base- a  pseudoprime, 944
base case
of a divide-and-conquer algorithm, 34 ,  76
of a recurrence, 41 ,  77 – 78
base, in DNA, 393
basis function, 841
Bayes’ s theorem, 1 189
B ELLMAN -F ORD , 612
Bellman-Ford algorithm, 612 – 616
for all-pairs shortest paths, 647
in Johnson’ s algorithm, 664 – 666
and objective functions, 632  ex.
to solve systems of dif ference constraints, 630 – 631
Y en’ s improvement to, 640  pr .
Bernoulli trial, 1 196
and balls and bins, 143 – 144
in bucket sort analysis, 217
in finding prime numbers, 943
in randomized selection analysis, 232
and streaks, 144 – 150
best-case running time, 34  ex.
β -smooth function, 1041
BFS, 556
see also  breadth-first search
B IASED -R ANDOM , 129  ex.
biconnected component, 582  pr .
Page number: 1460
big-oh notation ( O ), 50 ,  54 – 55
big-omega notation (Ω), 51 ,  54  fig.,  55 – 56
bijective function, 1 162
binary character code, 431
binary counter
analyzed by accounting method, 455
analyzed by aggregate analysis, 451 – 453
analyzed by potential method, 458 – 459
binary entropy function, 1 182
binary gcd algorithm, 953  pr .
binary heap, see  heap
binary logarithm (lg), 66
binary reflected Gray code, 471  pr .
binary relation, 1 158
binary search, 44  ex.
with fast insertion, 472  pr .
in insertion sort, 45  ex.
in parallel mer ging, 777 – 778
in searching B-trees, 512  ex.
binary search tree, 312 – 330
AA-trees, 358
A VL trees, 357  pr .,  358
deletion from, 322 – 325 ,  326  ex.
with equal keys, 327  pr .
insertion into, 321 – 322
k -neighbor trees, 358
left-leaning red-black binary search trees, 358
maximum key of, 317 – 318
minimum key of, 317 – 318
optimal, 400 – 407
persistent, 355  pr .
predecessor in, 318 – 319
querying, 316 – 320
randomly built, 328  pr .
red-black trees, 331 – 359
right-converting of, 337  ex.
scapegoat trees, 358
searching, 316 – 317
for sorting, 326  ex.
splay trees, 359
successor in, 318 – 319
weight-balanced trees, 358
see also  red-black tree
binary-search-tree property , 313 – 314
vs. min-heap property , 315  ex.
binary tree, 1 173
full, 433 ,  1 174
number of dif ferent ones, 329  pr .
representation of, 265
see also  binary search tree
Page number: 1461
binomial coef ficient, 1 181 – 1 182
binomial distribution, 1 198 – 1201
and balls and bins, 143
in bucket sort analysis, 217
maximum value of, 1202  ex.
tails of, 1203 – 1210
binomial expansion, 1 181
binomial theorem, 1 181
bin packing, 1 131  pr .
bipartite graph, 1 167
complete, 716
corresponding flow network of, 694
d -regular , 716  ex.,  740  pr .
matching in, 693 – 697 ,  704 – 743
bipartite matching, 693 – 697 ,  704 – 743
birthday paradox, 140 – 143
bisection of a tree, 1 177  pr .
bitonic euclidean traveling-salesperson problem, 407  pr .
bitonic sequence, 644  pr .
bitonic tour , 407  pr .
bit operation, 904
in Euclid’ s algorithm, 954  pr .
bit-reversal permutation, 897
bit vector , 274  ex.
black-height, 332
black vertex, 554 ,  564
block
in a cache, 440 ,  802
on a disk, 499 ,  512  ex.,  517  pr .
blocking flow , 702
blocking pair , 716
block representation of matrices, 254
block structure in pseudocode, 21 – 22
body , 1032
Boole’ s inequality , 1 190  ex.
boolean combinational circuit, 1065
boolean combinational element, 1065
boolean connective, 1073
boolean data type, 26
boolean formula, 1043 ,  1060  ex.,  1073 – 1074
boolean function, 1 182  ex.
boolean operators, 24
Bor ů vka’ s algorithm, 603
bottleneck spanning tree, 601  pr .
bottleneck traveling-salesperson problem, 1 1 15  ex.
bottoming out, 76
bottom of a stack, 254
B OTT OM -U P -C UT -R OD , 369
bottom-up method, for dynamic programming, 368
bound
Page number: 1462
asymptotically tight, 56
asymptotic lower , 55
asymptotic upper , 54
on binomial coef ficients, 1 181 – 1 182
on binomial distributions, 1201
polylogarithmic, 67
on the tails of a binomial distribution, 1203 – 1210
see also  lower bounds
bounding a summation, 1 145 – 1 152
box, nesting, 640  pr .
B+-tree, 501
branch instructions, 26
breadth-first forest, 728
breadth-first search, 554 – 563
in the Hopcroft-Karp algorithm, 71 1
in the Hungarian algorithm, 727 – 728
in maximum flow , 689 – 691
and shortest paths, 558 – 561 ,  605
similarity to Dijkstra’ s algorithm, 624 ,  625  ex.
breadth-first tree, 555 ,  561
bridge, 582  pr .
B*-tree, 502  n.
B-tree, 497 – 519
compared with red-black trees, 497 ,  503
creating, 505 – 506
deletion from, 513 – 516
full node in, 502
height of, 502 – 504
insertion into, 506 – 51 1
minimum degree of, 502
properties of, 501 – 504
searching, 504 – 505
splitting a node in, 506 – 508
2-3-4 trees, 502
B-T REE -C REA TE , 506
B-T REE -D ELETE , 513
B-T REE -I NSER T , 508
B-T REE -I NSER T -N ONFULL , 51 1
B-T REE -S EARCH , 505 ,  512  ex.
B-T REE -S PLIT -C HILD , 507
B-T REE -S PLIT -R OOT , 509
B UBBLESOR T , 46  pr .
bucket, 215
bucket sort, 215 – 219
B UCKET -S OR T , 216
B UILD -M AX -H EAP , 167
B UILD -M AX -H EAP ′, 179  pr .
B UILD -M IN -H EAP , 169
Burrows-Wheeler transform (BWT), 1000  pr .
butterfly operation, 894
Page number: 1463
BWT (Burrows-Wheeler transform), 1000  pr .
by , in pseudocode, 22
cache, 27 ,  301 ,  440 ,  802
cache block, 301 ,  440 ,  802
cache hit, 440 ,  803
cache line, see  cache block
cache miss, 440 ,  803
cache obliviousness, 519
caching
of fline, 440 – 446
online, 802 – 815
call
in a parallel computation, 753
of a subroutine, 26 ,  29  n.
by value, 23
cancellation lemma, 886
cancellation of flow , 679
capacity
of a cut, 682
of an edge, 671
residual, 677 ,  681
of a vertex, 676  ex.
capacity constraint, 672
cardinality of a set (| |), 1 156
Carmichael number , 945 ,  953  ex.
Cartesian product (×), 1 157
Cartesian sum, 885  ex.
Catalan numbers, 329  pr .,  375
CBC-MAC, 291 ,  306
c -competitive, 793
ceiling function ( ⌈  ⌉ ), 63
in recurrences, 1 16 – 1 17
ceiling instruction, 26
center of a cluster , 1008
centralized scheduler , 759
centroid of a cluster , 1009
certain event, 1 185
certificate
in a cryptosystem, 942
for verification algorithms, 1058
C HAINED -H ASH -D ELETE , 278
C HAINED -H ASH -I NSER T , 278
C HAINED -H ASH -S EARCH , 278
chaining, 277 – 281 ,  308  pr .
changing variables, to solve a recurrence, 120  pr .
character code, 431
character data type, 26
chess-playing program, 768 – 769
child
Page number: 1464
in a binary tree, 1 173
in a parallel computation, 753
in a rooted tree, 1 172
Chinese remainder theorem, 928 – 931
chirp transform, 893  ex.
choose 
 , 1 180
chord, 486  ex.
Cilk, 750 ,  790
ciphertext, 938
circuit
boolean combinational, 1065
depth of, 894
for fast Fourier transform, 894 – 897
CIRCUIT -SA T , 1067
circuit satisfiability , 1064 – 1071
circular , doubly linked list with a sentinel, 262
circular linked list, 259
class
complexity , 1054
equivalence, 1 159
classification of edges
in breadth-first search, 581  pr .
in depth-first search, 569 – 570 ,  571  ex.
clause, 1075 – 1076
clean area, 222  pr .
climate change, 845
clique, 1081
CLIQUE, 1081
clique problem
approximation algorithm for , 1 131  pr .
NP-completeness of, 1081 – 1084
closed convex body , 1032
closed interval ([ a , b ]), 1 157
closed semiring, 669
closest-point heuristic, 1 1 15  ex.
closure
group property , 917
of a language (*), 1052
transitive, see  transitive closure
cluster , 1008
for parallel computing, 748
clustering, 1005 – 1013
Lloyd’ s procedure for , 101 1 – 1013
primary , 303
CNF (conjunctive normal form), 1043 ,  1076
CNF satisfiability , 1 124  ex.
coarsening leaves of recursion
in mer ge sort, 45  pr .
in quicksort, 198  ex.
when recursively spawning, 764
Page number: 1465
code, 431 – 432
Huf fman, 431 – 439
codeword, 432
codomain, 1 161
coef ficient
binomial, 1 181
of a polynomial, 65 ,  877
coef ficient representation, 879
and fast multiplication, 882 – 884
cofactor , 1221
coin changing, 446  pr .
coin flipping, 131 – 132
collection of sets, 1 156
collision, 275
resolution by chaining, 277 – 281
resolution by open addressing, 293 – 301
collision-resistant hash function, 941
coloring, 425  ex.,  1 100  pr .,  1 176  pr .
color , of a red-black-tree node, 331
column-major order , 222  pr .,  253
column rank, 1220
columnsort, 222  pr .
column vector , 1215
combination, 1 180
combinational circuit, 1065
combinational element, 1065
combine step, in divide-and-conquer , 34 ,  76
comment, in pseudocode ( // ), 22
commodity , 864
common divisor , 906
greatest, see  greatest common divisor
common multiple, 916  ex.
common subexpression, 894
common subsequence, 394
longest, 393 – 399
commutative laws for sets, 1 154
commutative operation, 917
compact list, 269  pr .
C OMP ACT -L IST -S EARCH , 269  pr .
C OMP ACT -L IST -S EARCH ′, 270  pr .
C OMP ARE -E XCHANGE , 222  pr .
C OMP ARE -E XCHANGE -I NSER TION -S OR T , 223  pr .
compare-exchange operation, 222  pr .
comparison sort, 205
and binary search trees, 315  ex.
randomized, 219  pr .
and selection, 241
compatible activities, 418
compatible matrices, 1218
competitive analysis, 792
Page number: 1466
competitive ratio, 793
expected, 808
unbounded, 804
complement
of an event, 1 186
of a graph, 1085
of a language, 1052
Schur , 825 ,  839
of a set, 1 155
complementary slackness, 873  pr .
complete graph, 1 167
bipartite, 716
complete k -ary tree, 1 174
see also  heap
completeness of a language, 1072  ex.
complete step, 759
completion time, 446  pr .,  816  pr .,  1 133  pr .
C OMPLETION -T IME -S CHEDULE , 817  pr .
complexity class, 1054
co-NP , 1059
NP , 1043 ,  1058 ,  1060  ex.
NPC, 1044 ,  1063
P , 1043 ,  1050 ,  1054 ,  1055  ex.
complexity measure, 1054
complex numbers
inverting matrices of, 838  ex.
multiplication of, 90  ex.
complex root of unity , 885
interpolation at, 891 – 892
component
biconnected, 582  pr .
connected, 1 166
strongly connected, 1 166
component graph, 576
composite number , 905
witness to, 946
composition
of logarithms, 66
of parallel traces, 762  fig.
compression
by Huf fman code, 431 – 439
of images, 412  pr .
compulsory miss, 440
computational depth, see  span
computational problem, 5 – 6
computation dag, 754  n.
C OMPUTE -LCP , 993
C OMPUTE -P REFIX -F UNCTION , 978
C OMPUTE -S UFFIX -A RRA Y , 988
C OMPUTE -T RANSITION -F UNCTION , 974
Page number: 1467
concatenation
of languages, 1052
operator ( ∥ ), 291
of strings, 959
concrete problem, 1049
conditional branch instruction, 26
conditional independence, 1 190  ex.
conditional probability , 1 187 ,  1 189
configuration, 1068
conjugate of the golden ratio (
 ), 69 ,  70  ex.
conjugate transpose, 838  ex.
conjunctive normal form, 1043 ,  1076
connected component, 1 166
identified using depth-first search, 572  ex.
identified using disjoint-set data structures, 521 – 523
C ONNECTED -C OMPONENTS , 522
connected graph, 1 166
connective, 1073
co-NP (complexity class), 1059
conquer step, in divide-and-conquer , 34 ,  76
conservation of flow , 672
consistency
of literals, 1082
sequential, 756
constrained gradient descent, 1032 – 1034
constraint
dif ference, 627
equality , 632  ex.
linear , 851 ,  853 – 854
nonnegativity , 854
constraint graph, 628 – 630
contain, in a path, 1 165
continuous master theorem, 1 12
proof of, 107 – 1 15
continuous uniform probability distribution, 1 187
contraction
of a dynamic table, 465 – 470
of an undirected graph by an edge, 1 168
contraction algorithm, 701  pr .
control instructions, 26
conver gence property , 61 1 ,  634 – 635
conver gent series, 1 140
converting binary to decimal, 910  ex.
convex body , 1032
convex function, 1025 – 1027 ,  1 194
α -strongly convex, 1041
convex set, 675  ex.
convolution ( ⊗ ), 880
convolution theorem, 892
copy instruction, 26
Page number: 1468
correctness of an algorithm, 6
corresponding flow network for bipartite matching, 694
countably infinite set, 1 156
counter , see  binary counter
counting, 1 178 – 1 184
probabilistic, 153  pr .
counting sort, 208 – 21 1
in computing suf fix arrays, 992
in radix sort, 213
C OUNTING -S OR T , 209
coupon collector ’ s problem, 144
cover
path, 698  pr .
by a subfamily , 1 1 16
vertex, 1084 ,  1 106
credit, 453
critical edge, 690
critical path
in a dag, 619
of a PER T chart, 617
of a task-parallel trace, 757
cross a cut, 587 ,  701  pr .
cross edge, 569
cryptographic hash function, 291
cryptosystem, 936 – 942
cubic spline, 847  pr .
currency exchange, 641  pr .
curve fitting, 841 – 845
cut
capacity of, 682
of a flow network, 682 – 685
global, 701  pr .
minimum, 682
net flow across, 682
of an undirected graph, 587
weight of, 1 124  ex.
C UT -R OD , 366
cycle of a graph, 1 165 – 1 166
hamiltonian, 1043 ,  1056 ,  1085 – 1090
minimum mean-weight, 642  pr .
negative-weight, see  negative-weight cycle
and shortest paths, 607 – 608
cycle cover , 741  pr .
cyclic group, 932
dag, see  directed acyclic graph
D AG -S HOR TEST -P A THS , 617
d -ary heap, 179  pr .
in shortest-paths algorithms, 668  pr .
data-movement instructions, 26
Page number: 1469
data-parallel model, 789
data science, 14 – 15
data structure, 9 ,  249 – 359 ,  477 – 545
AA-trees, 358
augmentation of, 480 – 496
A VL trees, 357  pr .,  358
binary search trees, 312 – 330
bit vectors, 274  ex.
B-trees, 497 – 519
deques, 258  ex.
dictionaries, 249
direct-address tables, 273 – 275
for disjoint sets, 520 – 545
for dynamic graphs, 479
dynamic sets, 249 – 251
dynamic trees, 478
exponential search trees, 226 ,  478
Fibonacci heaps, 478
fusion trees, 226 ,  478
hash tables, 275 – 282
heaps, 161 – 181
interval trees, 489 – 495
k -neighbor trees, 358
left-leaning red-black binary search trees, 358
linked lists, 258 – 264
order -statistic trees, 480 – 486
persistent, 355  pr .,  478
potential of, 456
priority queues, 172 – 178
queues, 254 ,  256 – 257
radix trees, 327  pr .
red-black trees, 331 – 359
rooted trees, 265 – 268
scapegoat trees, 358
on secondary storage, 498 – 501
skip lists, 359
splay trees, 359 ,  478
stacks, 254 – 255
treaps, 358
2-3-4 trees, 502 ,  518  pr .
2-3 trees, 358 ,  519
van Emde Boas trees, 478
weight-balanced trees, 358
data type, 26
decision by an algorithm, 1053
decision problem, 1045 ,  1049
and optimization problems, 1045
decision tree, 206 – 207 ,  219  pr .
decision variable, 851
D ECREASE -K EY , 173
Page number: 1470
decrementing, 22
decryption, 936
default vertex labeling, 724
degree
minimum, of a B-tree, 502
of a node, 1 173
of a polynomial, 65 ,  877
of a vertex, 1 165
degree-bound, 877
D ELETE , 250
D ELETE -L ARGER -H ALF , 460  ex.
deletion
from binary search trees, 322 – 325 ,  326  ex.
from B-trees, 513 – 516
from chained hash tables, 278
from direct-address tables, 274
from dynamic tables, 465 – 470
from hash tables with linear probing, 302 – 303
from heaps, 178  ex.
from interval trees, 491
from linked lists, 261
from open-address hash tables, 294 – 295
from order -statistic trees, 484 – 485
from queues, 256
from red-black trees, 346 – 355
from stacks, 254
DeMor gan’ s laws
for propositional logic, 1078
for sets, 1 155 ,  1 158  ex.
dense graph, 549
ϵ -dense, 668  pr .
dense matrix, 81
density
of prime numbers, 943
of a rod, 372  ex.
dependence
and indicator random variables, 131
linear , 1220
see also  independence
depth
average, of a node in a randomly built binary search tree, 328  pr .
of a circuit, 894
of a node in a rooted tree, 1 173
of quicksort recursion tree, 191  ex.
of a stack, 202  pr .
depth-determination problem, 542  pr .
depth-first forest, 564
depth-first search, 563 – 572
in finding articulation points, bridges, and biconnected components, 582  pr .
in finding strongly connected components, 576 – 581
Page number: 1471
in the Hopcroft-Karp algorithm, 71 1
in topological sorting, 573 – 576
depth-first tree, 564
deque, 258  ex.
D EQUEUE , 257
derivative of a series, 1 142
descendant, 1 172
destination vertex, 605
det, 1221
determinacy race, 765 – 768
determinant, 1221
deterministic algorithm, 135
parallel, 765
D ETERMINISTIC -S EARCH , 154  pr .
DFS, 565
see also  depth-first search
DFS-V ISIT , 565
DFT , 888
diagonal matrix, 1215
diameter
of a network, 646
of a tree, 563  ex.
dictionary , 249
dif ference
of sets (−), 1 154
symmetric, 706
dif ference constraints, 626 – 632
dif ferentiation of a series, 1 142
digital signature, 938
digraph, see  directed graph
D IJKSTRA , 620
Dijkstra’ s algorithm, 620 – 626
for all-pairs shortest paths, 646 ,  666
with edge weights in a range, 626  ex.
implemented with a Fibonacci heap, 623 – 624
implemented with a min-heap, 623
with integer edge weights, 625 – 626  ex.
in Johnson’ s algorithm, 664
similarity to breadth-first search, 624 ,  625  ex.
similarity to Prim’ s algorithm, 624
d -independent family of hash functions, 288
D IRECT -A DDRESS -D ELETE , 274
direct addressing, 273 – 275
D IRECT -A DDRESS -I NSER T , 274
D IRECT -A DDRESS -S EARCH , 274
direct-address table, 273 – 275
directed acyclic graph (dag), 1 167
and back edges, 573
and component graphs, 578
and hamiltonian paths, 1060  ex.
Page number: 1472
longest simple path in, 407  pr .
for representing a parallel computation, 754
single-source shortest-paths algorithm for , 616 – 619
topological sort of, 573 – 576
directed equality subgraph, 727
directed graph, 1 164
all-pairs shortest paths in, 646 – 669
constraint graph, 628
Euler tour of, 583  pr .,  1043
hamiltonian cycle of, 1043
incidence matrix of, 553  ex.
and longest paths, 1042
path cover of, 698  pr .
PER T chart, 617 ,  619  ex.
semiconnected, 581  ex.
shortest path in, 604
single-source shortest paths in, 604 – 645
singly connected, 572  ex.
square of, 553  ex.
transitive closure of, 659
transpose of, 553  ex.
universal sink in, 553  ex.
see also  directed acyclic graph, graph, network
directed version of an undirected graph, 1 166
dirty area, 222  pr .
discovered vertex, 554 ,  564
discovery time, 565
discrete Fourier transform, 888
discrete logarithm, 933
discrete logarithm theorem, 933
discrete probability distribution, 1 186
discrete random variable, 1 191 – 1 196
disjoint-set data structure, 520 – 545
analysis of, 534 – 540
in connected components, 521 – 523
in depth determination, 542  pr .
disjoint-set-forest implementation of, 527 – 531
in Kruskal’ s algorithm, 593
linear -time special case of, 545
linked-list implementation of, 523 – 527
lower bound for , 545
in of fline lowest common ancestors, 543  pr .
in of fline minimum, 541  pr .
disjoint-set forest, 527 – 531
analysis of, 534 – 540
rank properties of, 533 – 534 ,  540  ex.
see also  disjoint-set data structure
disjoint sets, 1 156
disjunctive normal form, 1078
disk drive, 498 – 500
Page number: 1473
see also  secondary storage
D ISK -R EAD , 500
D ISK -W RITE , 500
dissimilarity , 1006
distance
edit, 409  pr .
Manhattan, 244  pr .
of a shortest path ( δ ), 558
distributed memory , 748
distribution
binomial, see  binomial distribution
continuous uniform, 1 187
discrete, 1 186
geometric, see  geometric distribution
of inputs, 128 ,  134
of prime numbers, 943
probability , 218  ex.,  1 185
uniform, 1 186
distributive laws for sets, 1 155
diver gent series, 1 140
divide-and-conquer method, 34 ,  76
analysis of, 39 – 41 ,  90 – 1 19
for binary search, 44  ex.
for conversion of binary to decimal, 910  ex.
for fast Fourier transform, 888 – 891 ,  895
for matrix inversion, 834 – 837
for matrix multiplication, 81 – 90 ,  770 – 775 ,  783  pr .
for mer ge sort, 34 – 44 ,  775 – 782
for multiplication, 899  pr .
for quicksort, 182 – 204
relation to dynamic programming, 362
for selection, 230 – 243
solving recurrences for , 90 – 1 19
for Strassen’ s algorithm, 85 – 90 ,  773 – 774
divide instruction, 26
divides relation (|), 904
divide step, in divide-and-conquer , 34 ,  76
division method, 284 ,  292  ex.
division theorem, 905
divisor , 904
common, 906
see also  greatest common divisor
DNA, 6 ,  393 – 394 ,  409  pr .
DNF (disjunctive normal form), 1078
does-not-divide relation ( ∤ ), 904
Dog River , 717
dolphins, allowing to vote, 850
domain, 1 161
double hashing, 295 – 297 ,  301  ex.
doubly linked list, 258 – 259 ,  264  ex.
Page number: 1474
circular , with a sentinel, 262
downto , in pseudocode, 22
d -regular graph, 716  ex.,  740  pr .
driving function, 101
duality , 734 ,  866 – 873 ,  874  pr .
weak, 868 – 869 ,  874  pr .
dual linear program, 866
dummy key , 400
dynamic graph, 523
all-pairs shortest paths algorithms for , 669
data structures for , 479
minimum-spanning-tree algorithm for , 599  ex.
transitive closure of, 667  pr .,  669
dynamic graph algorithm, 817
dynamic multiset, 460  ex.
dynamic order statistics, 480 – 486
dynamic-programming method, 362 – 416
for activity selection, 424  ex.
for all-pairs shortest paths, 648 – 659
for bitonic euclidean traveling-salesperson problem, 407  pr .
bottom-up, 368
for breaking a string, 412  pr .
compared with greedy method, 384 – 385 ,  393  ex.,  421 ,  426 – 430
for edit distance, 409  pr .
elements of, 382 – 393
for Floyd-W arshall algorithm, 655 – 659
for inventory planning, 414  pr .
for longest common subsequence, 393 – 399
for longest palindrome subsequence, 407  pr .
for longest simple path in a weighted directed acyclic graph, 407  pr .
for matrix-chain multiplication, 373 – 382
and memoization, 390 – 392
for optimal binary search trees, 400 – 407
optimal substructure in, 382 – 387
overlapping subproblems in, 387 – 390
for printing neatly , 408  pr .
reconstructing an optimal solution in, 390
relation to divide-and-conquer , 362
for rod cutting, 363 – 373
for seam carving, 412  pr .
for signing free agents, 414  pr .
top-down with memoization, 368
for transitive closure, 659 – 661
for V iterbi algorithm, 41 1  pr .
for the 0-1 knapsack problem, 430  ex.
dynamic set, 249 – 251
see also  data structure
dynamic table, 460 – 471
analyzed by accounting method, 463
analyzed by aggregate analysis, 462 – 463
Page number: 1475
analyzed by potential method, 463 – 470
load factor of, 461
dynamic tree, 478
E[ ], see  expected value
e  (base of the natural logarithm), 65
edge, 1 164
antiparallel, 673 – 674
attributes of, 552
back, 569
bridge, 582  pr .
capacity of, 671
classification in breadth-first search, 581  pr .
classification in depth-first search, 569 – 570 ,  571  ex.
critical, 690
cross, 569
forward, 569
light, 587
negative-weight, 606 – 607
residual, 678
safe, 587
tree, 561 ,  564 ,  569
weight of, 551
edge connectivity , 692  ex.
edge set, 1 164
edit distance, 409  pr .
Edmonds-Karp algorithm, 689 – 691
elementary event, 1 185
elementary insertion, 461
element of a set ( ∈ ), 1 153
ellipsoid algorithm, 857
elliptic-curve factorization method, 956
elseif , in pseudocode, 22  n.
else , in pseudocode, 22
empty language ( ∅ ), 1052
empty set ( ∅ ), 1 153
empty set laws, 1 154
empty stack, 255
empty string ( ε ), 959 ,  1052
empty tree, 1 173
encoding of problem instances, 1049 – 1052
encryption, 936
endpoint of an interval, 489
E NQUEUE , 257
entering a vertex, 1 164
entropy function, 1 182
epoch, 805
ϵ -dense graph, 668  pr .
ϵ -universal family of hash functions, 287 ,  292  ex.
equality
Page number: 1476
of functions, 1 162
linear , 853
of sets, 1 153
equality constraint, 632  ex.
equality subgraph, 724
directed, 727
equations and asymptotic notation, 58 – 59
equivalence class, 1 159
modulo n ([ a ] n ), 905
equivalence, modular (= (mod n )), 64
equivalence relation, 1 159
error bound, 1027
err or , in pseudocode, 24
escape problem, 697  pr .
E UCLID , 912
Euclid’ s algorithm, 91 1 – 916 ,  954  pr .
euclidean norm ( ∥  ∥ ), 1219
Euler ’ s constant, 921
Euler ’ s phi function, 920
Euler ’ s theorem, 932 ,  953  ex.
Euler tour , 583  pr .,  740  pr .
and hamiltonian cycles, 1043
evaluation of a polynomial, 46  pr .,  879 ,  884  ex.
derivatives of, 900  pr .
at multiple points, 900  pr .
event, 1 185
event-driven simulation, 173 ,  181
E XACT -S UBSET -S UM , 1 125
example, in clustering, 1006
exclusion and inclusion, 1 158  ex.
execute a subroutine, 29  n.
expansion of a dynamic table, 461 – 465
expectation, see  expected value
expected competitive ratio, 808
expected running time, 32 ,  129
expected value, 1 192 – 1 194
of a binomial distribution, 1 198
of a geometric distribution, 1 197
of an indicator random variable, 130
explored edge, 565
exponential function, 65 – 66
exponential search tree, 226 ,  478
exponentiation
of logarithms, 66
modular , 934 – 935
exponentiation instruction, 27
E XTENDED -B OTT OM -U P -C UT -R OD , 372
E XTENDED -E UCLID , 914
E XTEND -S HOR TEST -P A THS , 650
external node, 1 172
Page number: 1477
external path length, 1 175  ex.
extracting the maximum key
from d -ary heaps, 179  pr .
from max-heaps, 174
extracting the minimum key
from Y oung tableaus, 179  pr .
E XTRACT -M AX , 173 – 174
E XTRACT -M IN , 173
factor , 904
twiddle, 891
factorial function (!), 67 – 68
factorization, 956
unique, 909
failure, in a Bernoulli trial, 1 196
fair coin, 1 186
family of hash functions, 286 – 288 ,  292  ex.
fan-out, 1066
Farkas’ s lemma, 869
F ASTER -APSP , 653 ,  655  ex.
fast Fourier transform (FFT), 877 – 902
circuit for , 894 – 897
multidimensional, 899  pr .
recursive implementation of, 888 – 891
using modular arithmetic, 901  pr .
feasibility problem, 627 ,  873  pr .
feasible linear program, 854
feasible region, 854
feasible solution, 627 ,  854
feasible vertex labeling, 724 ,  742  pr .
feature vector , 1006
Fermat’ s theorem, 932
FFT , 890
see also  fast Fourier transform
FFTW , 902
F IB , 751
Fibonacci heap, 478
in Dijkstra’ s algorithm, 623 – 624
in Johnson’ s algorithm, 666
in Prim’ s algorithm, 597
Fibonacci numbers, 69 ,  70  ex.,  121  pr .
computation of, 750 – 753 ,  954  pr .
FIFO, see  first-in, first-out; queue
final-state function, 968
F IND -A UGMENTING -P A TH , 738
F IND -D EPTH , 542  pr .
find path, 528
F IND -POM, 496  pr .
F IND -S ET , 521
disjoint-set-forest implementation of, 530 ,  544
Page number: 1478
linked-list implementation of, 523
F IND -S PLIT -P OINT , 778
finished vertex, 564
finish time
in activity selection, 418
in depth-first search, 565
and strongly connected components, 578
finite automaton, 967 – 975
F INITE -A UT OMA T ON -M A TCHER , 971
finite group, 917
finite sequence, 1 162
finite set, 1 156
finite sum, 1 140
first-fit heuristic, 1 131  pr .
first-in, first-out (FIFO), 254 ,  803 – 804 ,  814  ex.
implemented with a priority queue, 178  ex.
see also  queue
fixed-length code, 432
floating-point data type, 26
floor function ( ⌊  ⌋ ), 63
in recurrences, 1 16 – 1 17
floor instruction, 26
flow , 671 – 676
aggregate, 864
augmentation of, 678
blocking, 702
cancellation of, 679
integer -valued, 695
net, across a cut, 682
value of, 672
flow conservation, 672
flow network, 671 – 676
corresponding to a bipartite graph, 694
cut of, 682 – 685
with multiple sources and sinks, 674
F LOYD -W ARSHALL , 657
F LOYD -W ARSHALL ′, 661  ex.
Floyd-W arshall algorithm, 655 – 659 ,  661 – 662  ex.
flying cars, highways for , 850
F ORD -F ULKERSON , 686
Ford-Fulkerson method, 676 – 693
F ORD -F ULKERSON -M ETHOD , 676
F ORESEE , 797
forest, 1 167 ,  1 169
breadth-first, 728
depth-first, 564
disjoint-set, 527 – 531
for , in pseudocode, 22
and loop invariants, 21  n.
fork-join parallelism, 749 – 770
Page number: 1479
see also  parallel algorithm
fork-join scheduling, 759 – 761 ,  769  ex.
formal power series, 121  pr .
formula satisfiability , 1073 – 1076
forward edge, 569
forward substitution, 822 – 823
Fourier transform, see  discrete Fourier transform, fast Fourier transform
fractional knapsack problem, 429
fractional matching, 741  pr .
free tree, 1 167 ,  1 169 – 1 171
frequency count, 802  ex.
frequency domain, 877
full binary tree, 1 174
relation to optimal code, 433
full node, 502
full rank, 1220
full walk of a tree, 1 1 12
fully parenthesized matrix-chain product, 374
fully polynomial-time approximation scheme, 1 105
for subset sum, 1 124 – 1 130
function, 1 161 – 1 163
Ackermann’ s, 544
α -strongly convex, 1041
basis, 841
β -smooth, 1041
boolean, 1 182  ex.
convex, 1025 – 1027 ,  1 194
driving, 101
final-state, 968
hash, see  hash function
iterated, 68 ,  74  pr .
linear , 30 ,  853
objective, 626 ,  852 ,  854
potential, 456
prefix, 975 – 977
probability distribution, 218  ex.
quadratic, 31
reduction, 1062
suf fix, 968
transition, 967 ,  973 – 974
watershed, 103
functional iteration, 68
fundamental theorem of linear programming, 872
furthest-in-future, 441
fusion tree, 226 ,  478
fuzzy sorting, 203  pr .
Gabow’ s scaling algorithm for single-source shortest paths, 641  pr .
gadget, 1086 ,  1097
G ALE -S HAPLEY , 719
Page number: 1480
Gale-Shapley algorithm, 718 – 722
Galois field of two elements ( GF (2)), 1224  pr .
gap character , 961  ex.,  975  ex.
gate, 1065
Gaussian elimination, 825
gcd, see  greatest common divisor
GCD recursion theorem, 91 1
general arithmetic series, 1 141
general number -field sieve, 956
generating function, 121  pr .
generation of partitioned sets, 234
generator
of a subgroup, 922
of 
 , 932
G ENERIC -MST , 587
geometric distribution, 1 196 – 1 198
and balls and bins, 143 – 144
in finding prime numbers, 943
in randomized selection analysis, 232
geometric series, 1 142
GF (2) (Galois field of two elements), 1224  pr .
global cut, 701  pr .
global minimizer , 1022 ,  1024  fig.,  1026  fig.
global variable, 22
golden ratio ( ϕ ), 69 ,  70  ex.
gossiping, 475
gradient descent, 1022 – 1038
constrained, 1032 – 1034
in machine learning, 1035 – 1037
for solving systems of linear equations, 1034 – 1035
stochastic, 1040  pr .
unconstrained, 1023 – 1031
G RADIENT -D ESCENT , 1025
G RADIENT -D ESCENT -C ONSTRAINED , 1032
gradient of a function, 1023
G RAFT , 542  pr .
grain size in a parallel algorithm, 783  pr .
graph, 1 164 – 1 169
adjacency-list representation of, 550 – 551
adjacency-matrix representation of, 551 – 552
and asymptotic notation, 548
attributes of, 548 ,  552
breadth-first search of, 554 – 563
coloring of, 1 100  pr .
complement of, 1085
component, 576
constraint, 628 – 630
dense, 549
depth-first search of, 563 – 572
dynamic, 523 ,  817
Page number: 1481
ϵ -dense, 668  pr .
hamiltonian, 1056
interval, 425  ex.
matching in, 693 – 697 ,  704 – 743
nonhamiltonian, 1056
planar , 584  pr .
regular , 716  ex.,  740  pr .
shortest path in, 558
singly connected, 572  ex.
sparse, 549
static, 522
subproblem, 370 – 371
tour of, 1090
weighted, 551
see also  directed acyclic graph, directed graph, flow network, undirected graph, tree
GRAPH-ISOMORPHISM, 1060  ex.
Gray code, 471  pr .
gray vertex, 554 ,  564
greatest common divisor (gcd), 906 – 907 ,  910  ex.
binary gcd algorithm for , 953  pr .
Euclid’ s algorithm for , 91 1 – 916 ,  954  pr .
with more than two ar guments, 916  ex.
recursion theorem for , 91 1
G REEDY -A CTIVITY -S ELECT OR , 424
G REEDY -B IP AR TITE -M A TCHING , 726
greedy-choice property , 427 – 428
of activity selection, 420 – 421
of Huf fman codes, 436 – 437
of of fline caching, 442 – 445
greedy method, 417 – 447
for activity selection, 418 – 425
for coin changing, 446  pr .
compared with dynamic programming, 384 – 385 ,  393  ex.,  421 ,  426 – 430
Dijkstra’ s algorithm, 620 – 626
elements of, 426 – 431
for the fractional knapsack problem, 429
greedy-choice property in, 427 – 428
for Huf fman code, 431 – 439
Kruskal’ s algorithm, 592 – 594
for maximal bipartite matching, 726
for minimum spanning tree, 591 – 599
for of fline caching, 440 – 446
optimal substructure in, 428
Prim’ s algorithm, 594 – 597
for set cover , 1 1 15 – 1 1 19
for task-parallel scheduling, 759 – 761 ,  769  ex.
for task scheduling, 446  pr .
for weighted set cover , 1 132  pr .
greedy scheduler , 759
G REEDY -S ET -C OVER , 1 1 17
Page number: 1482
grid, 697  pr .
group, 916 – 923
cyclic, 932
operator ( ⊕ ), 917
growth step, 736
guessing the solution, in the substitution method, 92
Habanero-Java, 750
half 3-CNF satisfiability , 1099  ex.
half-open interval ([ a , b ) or ( a , b ]), 1 157
Hall’ s theorem, 715  ex.
halting, 6
halting problem, 1042
halving lemma, 887
HAM-CYCLE, 1056
hamiltonian cycle, 1043 ,  1056
NP completeness of, 1085 – 1090
hamiltonian graph, 1056
hamiltonian path, 1060  ex.,  1098  ex.
HAM-P A TH, 1060  ex.
handle, 173
handshaking lemma, 1 168  ex.
harmonic number , 1 142 ,  1 149
harmonic series, 1 142 ,  1 149
H ASH -D ELETE , 300  ex.
hash function, 275 ,  282 – 292
auxiliary , 295
collision-resistant, 941
cryptographic, 291
division method for , 284 ,  292  ex.
for hierarchical memory , 304 – 307
multiplication method for , 284 – 286
multiply-shift method for , 285 – 286
random, 286 – 290
static, 282 ,  284 – 286
universal, 286 – 290
wee, 305 – 307
see also  family of hash functions
hashing, 272 – 31 1
with chaining, 277 – 281 ,  308  pr .
double, 295 – 297 ,  301  ex.
independent uniform, 276
with linear probing, 297 ,  302 – 304
in memoization, 368 ,  391
with open addressing, 293 – 301 ,  308  pr .
perfect, 310
random, 286 – 290
to replace adjacency lists, 553  ex.
of static sets, 308  pr .
of strings, 290 – 291 ,  292  ex.
Page number: 1483
uniform, 278
universal, 286 – 290 ,  309  pr .
of variable-length inputs, 290 – 291
of vectors, 290 – 291
H ASH -I NSER T , 294 ,  300  ex.
H ASH -S EARCH , 294 ,  300  ex.
hash table, 275 – 282
dynamic, 470  ex.
used within a priority queue, 174
see also  hashing
hash value, 275
hat-check problem, 134  ex.
head
in a disk drive, 498
of a linked list, 259
of a queue, 256
heap, 161 – 181
analyzed by potential method, 459  ex.
building, 167 – 170 ,  178  pr .
in constructing Huf fman codes, 436
d -ary , 179  pr .,  668  pr .
deletion from, 178  ex.
in Dijkstra’ s algorithm, 623
extracting the maximum key from, 174
Fibonacci, 478
height of, 163
increasing a key in, 174 – 175
insertion into, 175
in Johnson’ s algorithm, 666
max-heap, 162
maximum key of, 174
mer geable, 268  pr .
min-heap, 163
in Prim’ s algorithm, 597
as a priority queue, 172 – 178
H EAP -D ECREASE -K EY , 176  ex.
H EAP -E XTRACT -M IN , 176  ex.
H EAP -M INIMUM , 176  ex.
heap property , 162
maintenance of, 164 – 167
vs. binary-search-tree property , 315  ex.
heapsort, 161 – 181
lower bound for , 207
H EAPSOR T , 170
H EDGE , 1039  pr .
height
black-, 332
of a B-tree, 502 – 504
of a d -ary heap, 179  pr .
of a decision tree, 207
Page number: 1484
of a heap, 163
of a node in a heap, 163 ,  170  ex.
of a node in a tree, 1 173
of a red-black tree, 332
of a tree, 1 173
height-balanced tree, 357  pr .
helpful partitioning, 232
Hermitian matrix, 838  ex.
Hessian matrix, 1035
heuristic
first-fit for bin packing, 1 131  pr .
path compression, 528
in the Rabin-Karp algorithm, 965
for the set-covering problem, 1 1 16 ,  1 132  pr .
table doubling, 461
for the traveling-salesperson problem, 1 1 15  ex.
union by rank, 528
weighted union, 525
high endpoint of an interval, 489
high side of a partition, 183
H IRE -A SSIST ANT , 127
hiring problem, 126 – 127 ,  135 – 136
online, 150 – 152
probabilistic analysis of, 132 – 133
hit, 965
H OARE -P AR TITION , 199  pr .
H OPCROFT -K ARP , 709
Hopcroft-Karp algorithm, 709 – 715
H ORNER , 47  pr .
Horner ’ s rule, 46  pr .,  879 ,  963
H UFFMAN , 434
Huf fman code, 431 – 439
Human Genome Project, 6
H UNGARIAN , 737
Hungarian algorithm, 723 – 739 ,  740  pr .
hybrid cryptosystem, 941
hyperedge, 1 167
hyper graph, 1 167
hypotheses, 1003
ideal parallel computer , 756
idempotency laws, 1 154
identity , 917
identity matrix, 1215
identity permutation, 138  ex.
if , in pseudocode, 22
ill-defined recurrence, 77
image, 1 162
image compression, 412  pr .
incidence, 1 164 – 1 165
Page number: 1485
incidence matrix
and dif ference constraints, 628
of a directed graph, 553  ex.
inclusion and exclusion, 1 158  ex.
incomplete step, 759
I NCREASE -K EY , 173
increasing a key , in a max-heap, 174 – 175
I NCREMENT , 451
incremental design method, 34
incrementing, 21
in-degree, 1 165
indentation in pseudocode, 21 – 22
independence
of events, 1 188 ,  1 190  ex.
of random variables, 1 192
of subproblems in dynamic programming, 386 – 387
independent family of hash functions, 288
independent set, 1099  pr .
independent uniform hash function, 276
independent uniform hashing, 276 ,  278
independent uniform permutation hashing, 295
indexing into an array , 22 – 23 ,  26  n.,  252
index of an element of 
 , 933
indicator random variable, 130 – 133
in approximation algorithm for MAX-3-CNF satisfiability , 1 120 – 1 121
in birthday paradox analysis, 142 – 143
in bounding the right tail of the binomial distribution, 1207 – 1208
in coin flipping analysis, 131 – 132
expected value of, 130
in hashing analysis, 279 – 281
in the hat-check problem, 134  ex.
in hiring-problem analysis, 132 – 133
and linearity of expectation, 131
in quicksort analysis, 197 – 198 ,  200  pr .
in randomized caching analysis, 812
in randomized-selection analysis, 245  pr .
in streak analysis, 148 – 150
induced subgraph, 1 166
inequality , linear , 853
infeasible linear program, 854
infeasible solution, 854
inference, 1004
infinite sequence, 1 162
infinite set, 1 156
infinite sum, 1 140
infinity , arithmetic with, 61 1
initialization of a loop invariant, 20
I NITIALIZE -S INGLE -S OURCE , 609
injective function, 1 162
inner product, 1219
Page number: 1486
inorder tree walk, 314 ,  320  ex.
I NORDER -T REE -W ALK , 314
in-place permuting, 136
in-place sorting, 158 ,  220  pr .
in play , 232
input
to an algorithm, 5
to a combinational circuit, 1066
distribution of, 128 ,  134
to a logic gate, 1065
size of, 28
input alphabet, 967
I NSER T , 173 ,  250 ,  460  ex.
insertion
into binary search trees, 321 – 322
into B-trees, 506 – 51 1
into chained hash tables, 278
into d -ary heaps, 179  pr .
into direct-address tables, 274
into dynamic tables, 461 – 465
elementary , 461
into heaps, 175
into interval trees, 491
into linked lists, 260
into open-address hash tables, 293 – 294
into order -statistic trees, 484
into queues, 256
into red-black trees, 338 – 346
into stacks, 254
into Y oung tableaus, 179  pr .
insertion sort, 17 – 21 ,  29 – 31 ,  51 – 53 ,  56 – 57
in bucket sort, 216 – 218
compared with mer ge sort, 12 – 13 ,  15  ex.
compared with quicksort, 191  ex.
decision tree for , 206  fig.
lower bound for , 52 – 53
in mer ge sort, 45  pr .
in quicksort, 198  ex.
using binary search, 45  ex.
I NSER TION -S OR T , 19 ,  30 ,  51
instance
of an abstract problem, 1045 ,  1049
of a problem, 6
instructions of the RAM model, 26
integer data type, 26
integer linear programming, 857 ,  874  pr .,  1098  ex.
integers ( ℤ ), 1 153
integer -valued flow , 695
integrality theorem, 696
integral, to approximate summations, 1 150
Page number: 1487
integration of a series, 1 142
interior -point methods, 857
intermediate vertex, 655
internal node, 1 172
internal path length, 1 175  ex.
interpolation by a cubic spline, 847  pr .
interpolation by a polynomial, 880 ,  885  ex.
at complex roots of unity , 891 – 892
intersection
of chords, 486  ex.
of languages, 1052
of sets (∩), 1 154
interval, 489 – 490 ,  1 157
fuzzy sorting of, 203  pr .
I NTER V AL -D ELETE , 490 ,  496  pr .
interval graph, 425  ex.
I NTER V AL -I NSER T , 490 ,  496  pr .
I NTER V AL -S EARCH , 490 ,  492
I NTER V AL -S EARCH -E XACTL Y , 495  ex.
interval tree, 489 – 495
interval trichotomy , 490
intractability , 1042
invalid shift, 957
inventory planning, 414  pr .
inverse
of a bijective function, 1 163
in a group, 917
of a matrix, 784  pr .,  833 – 837 ,  1220
multiplicative, modulo n , 927
inversion
in an array , 47  pr .
in linked lists, 798
in a sequence, 134  ex.,  486  ex.
inversion count, 798
inverter , 1065
invertible matrix, 1220
invocation tree, 756
isolated vertex, 1 165
isomorphic graphs, 1 166
iterated function, 68 ,  74  pr .
iterated logarithm function (lg*), 68
I TERA TIVE -T REE -S EARCH , 316
iter function, 536
Java Fork-Join Framework, 750
Jensen’ s inequality , 1 194
J OHNSON , 666
Johnson’ s algorithm, 662 – 667
joining
of red-black trees, 356  pr .
Page number: 1488
of 2-3-4 trees, 518  pr .
joint probability density function, 1 191
Josephus permutation, 496  pr .
Karmarkar ’ s algorithm, 876
Karp’ s minimum mean-weight cycle algorithm, 642  pr .
k -ary tree, 1 174
k -clustering, 1008
k -CNF , 1043
k -coloring, 1 100  pr .,  1 176  pr .
k -combination, 1 180
k -conjunctive normal form, 1043
Keeling curve, 845  fig.
key , 17 ,  157 ,  173 ,  249 ,  283 – 284
in a cryptosystem, 936 ,  939
dummy , 400
median, of a B-tree node, 506
keywords, in pseudocode, 21 – 22 ,  24
parallel, 750 ,  752 – 754 ,  762 – 763
Kleene star (*), 1052
k -means problem, 1008
KMP algorithm, 975 – 985
KMP-M A TCHER , 978
knapsack problem
decision version, 1096
fractional, 429
0-1, 428 ,  430  ex.,  1 134  pr .
k -neighbor tree, 358
knot, of a spline, 847  pr .
Knuth-Morris-Pratt algorithm, 975 – 985
k -permutation, 136 ,  1 180
Kraft inequality , 1 176  ex.
Kruskal’ s algorithm, 592 – 594
with integer edge weights, 598  ex.
k -sorted, 221  pr .
k -string, 1 179
k -subset, 1 156
k -substring, 1 179
k th power , 910  ex.
label
in machine learning, 1003 ,  1035
of a vertex, 724 ,  742  pr .
Lagrange’ s formula, 881
Lagrange’ s theorem, 921
Lamé’ s theorem, 913
language, 1052
completeness of, 1072  ex.
proving NP-completeness of, 1072 – 1073
verification of, 1058
Page number: 1489
lasers, sharks with, 850
last-in, first-out (LIFO), 254 ,  803 – 804
implemented with a priority queue, 178  ex.
see also  stack
latency , 499
LCA, 544  pr .
lcm (least common multiple), 916  ex.
LCP , see  longest common prefix array
LCS, 393 – 399
LCS-L ENGTH , 397
leading submatrix, 839
leaf, 1 172
least common multiple, 916  ex.
least frequently used (LFU), 803 ,  814  ex.
least recently used (LRU), 445  ex.,  803 – 805
least-squares approximation, 841 – 845 ,  1035 – 1037
leaving a vertex, 1 164
L EFT , 162
left child, 1 173
left-child, right-sibling representation, 265 ,  268  ex.
left-leaning red-black binary search tree, 358
L EFT -R OT A TE , 336 ,  495  ex.
left rotation, 335
left shift ( ⋘ ), 305
left subtree, 1 173
Legendre symbol 
 , 954  pr .
Page number: 1490
length
of a cycle, 1 165
of a path, 1 165
of a sequence, 1 162
of a string, 959 ,  1 179
level
of a function, 532
of a node in a disjoint-set forest, 535
of a tree, 1 173
lexicographically less than, 327  pr .
lexicographic sorting, 327  pr .,  986  n.
LFU (least frequently used), 803 ,  814  ex.
lg (binary logarithm), 66
lg* (iterated logarithm function), 68
lgk (exponentiation of logarithms), 66
lg lg (composition of logarithms), 66
LIFO, see  last-in, first-out; stack
light edge, 587
linear constraint, 853 – 854
linear dependence, 1220
linear equality , 853
linear equations
solving modular , 924 – 928
solving systems of, 819 – 833 ,  1034 – 1035
solving tridiagonal systems of, 847  pr .
linear function, 30 ,  853
linear independence, 1220
linear inequality , 853
linear -inequality feasibility problem, 873  pr .
linearity of expectation, 1 192 – 1 193
and indicator random variables, 131
linearity of summations, 1 141
linear order , 1 160
linear permutation, 1224  pr .
linear probing, 297 ,  302 – 304
L INEAR -P ROBING -H ASH -D ELETE , 303
linear programming, 850 – 876 ,  1 121 – 1 124
applications of, 860 – 866
duality in, 866 – 873
ellipsoid algorithm for , 857
fundamental theorem of, 872
integer , 857 ,  874  pr .
interior -point methods for , 857
Karmarkar ’ s algorithm for , 876
and maximum flow , 862
and minimum-cost circulation, 875  pr .
and minimum-cost flow , 862 – 864
and multicommodity flow , 864 – 865
simplex algorithm for , 857
and single-pair shortest path, 861
Page number: 1491
and single-source shortest paths, 626 – 632
standard form for , 854
see also  integer linear programming, 0-1 integer programming
linear -programming relaxation, 1 122
linear regression, 1036
linear search, 25  ex.
linear speedup, 758
line search, 1031
L INK , 530
linked list, 258 – 264
compact, 269  pr .
deletion from, 261
to implement disjoint sets, 523 – 527
insertion into, 260
maintained by an online algorithm, 795 – 802
searching, 260 ,  292  ex.
linking of trees in a disjoint-set forest, 529
list, see  linked list
L IST -D ELETE , 261
L IST -D ELETE ′, 262
L IST -I NSER T , 261
L IST -I NSER T ′, 263
L IST -P REPEND , 260
L IST -S EARCH , 260
L IST -S EARCH ′, 263
literal, 1076
little-oh notation ( o ), 60
little-omega notation ( ω ), 61
Lloyd’ s procedure, 101 1 – 1013 ,  1039  pr .
ln (natural logarithm), 66
load factor
of a dynamic table, 461
of a hash table, 278
load instruction, 26 ,  756
local minimizer , 1026  fig.
local variable, 22
logarithm function (log), 66 – 67
discrete, 933
iterated (lg*), 68
logical parallelism, 753
logical right shift ( ⋙ ), 285
logic gate, 1065
longest common prefix ( LCP ) array , 986 ,  992 – 994
longest common subsequence, 393 – 399
longest common substring, 995  ex.
longest monotonically increasing subsequence, 399  ex.
longest palindrome subsequence, 407  pr .
LONGEST -P A TH, 1055  ex.
LONGEST -P A TH-LENGTH, 1055  ex.
longest repeated substring, 987
Page number: 1492
longest simple cycle, 1098  ex.
longest simple path, 1042
in an unweighted graph, 385
in a weighted directed acyclic graph, 407  pr .
lookahead algorithm, 815  ex.
L OOKUP -C HAIN , 391
loop, in pseudocode, 22
parallel, 762 – 765
loop invariant, 19 – 20
for breadth-first search, 555
for building a heap, 167
for counting sort, 21 1  ex.
for determining the rank of an element in an order -statistic tree, 483
and for  loops, 21  n.
for the generic minimum-spanning-tree method, 586
for heapsort, 172  ex.
for Horner ’ s rule, 46  pr .
for increasing a key in a heap, 177  ex.
for insertion sort, 19 – 20
for partitioning, 184
for Prim’ s algorithm, 597
for the Rabin-Karp algorithm, 965
for randomly permuting an array , 137
for red-black tree insertion, 340
for string-matching automata, 970 ,  973
loss function, 1036
low endpoint of an interval, 489
lower bounds
asymptotic, 55
on binomial coef ficients, 1 181 ,  1 184  ex.
for comparing water jugs, 220  pr .
for competitive ratios for online caching, 804 – 806
for constructing binary search trees, 315  ex.
for disjoint-set data structures, 545
for finding the minimum, 228
for insertion sort, 52 – 53
for k -sorting, 221  pr .
for median finding, 247
for mer ging, 222  pr .
and potential functions, 475
for simultaneous minimum and maximum, 229  ex.
for sorting, 205 – 208 ,  219  pr .,  225
for streaks, 147 – 148 ,  153  ex.
on summations, 1 148 ,  1 150
for task-parallel computations, 757
for traveling-salesperson tour , 1 1 10 – 1 1 13
for vertex cover , 1 108 ,  1 121 – 1 123 ,  1 132  pr .
lower median, 227
lower -triangular matrix, 1216
lowest common ancestor , 543  pr .
Page number: 1493
low side of a partition, 183
LRU (least recently used), 445  ex.,  803 – 805
LU decomposition, 824 – 827
parallel algorithm for , 784  pr .
LU-D ECOMPOSITION , 827
LUP decomposition, 821
computation of, 828 – 832
in matrix inversion, 833 – 834
and matrix multiplication, 838  ex.
parallel algorithm for , 784  pr .
use of, 821 – 824
LUP-D ECOMPOSITION , 830
LUP-S OL VE , 824
machine learning, 14 ,  1003 – 1041
main memory , 498
maintenance of a loop invariant, 20
M AKE -R ANKS , 988
M AKE -S ET , 521
disjoint-set-forest implementation of, 530
linked-list implementation of, 523
makespan, 1 133  pr .
M AKE -T REE , 542  pr .
Manhattan distance, 244  pr .
M ARKING , 807 ,  815  ex.
Markov’ s inequality , 1 196  ex.
master method for solving a recurrence, 101 – 107
master recurrence, 101
master theorem, 102
continuous, 1 12
proof of, 107 – 1 15
matched vertex, 693 ,  705
matching, 704 – 743
bipartite, 693 – 697 ,  704 – 743
fractional, 741  pr .
by Hopcroft-Karp algorithm, 709 – 715
maximal, 705 ,  1 108 ,  1 132  pr .
maximum, 704 – 716 ,  1 132  pr .
and maximum flow , 693 – 697
perfect, 715  ex.,  740  pr .
stable, 716
of strings, 957 – 1002
unstable, 717
matrix, 1214 – 1226
addition of, 1217
adjacency , 551 – 552
conjugate transpose of, 838  ex.
dense, 81
determinant of, 1221
diagonal, 1215
Page number: 1494
Hermitian, 838  ex.
Hessian, 1035
identity , 1215
incidence, 553  ex.
inverse of, 784  pr .,  833 – 837 ,  1220
lower -triangular , 1216
minor of, 1221
multiplication of, see  matrix multiplication
negative of, 1217
permutation, 1217
positive-definite, 1222
positive-semidefinite, 1222
predecessor , 647 ,  655  ex.,  657 – 659 ,  661  ex.
product of, with a vector , 762 – 765 ,  767 ,  1218
pseudoinverse of, 843
representation of, 253 – 254
scalar multiple of, 1217
sparse, 81
subtraction of, 1218
symmetric, 1217
symmetric positive-definite, 838 – 841
transpose of, 1214
tridiagonal, 1216
unit lower -triangular , 1216
unit upper -triangular , 1216
upper -triangular , 1216
V andermonde, 881 ,  1223  pr .
matrix-chain multiplication, 373 – 382
M A TRIX -C HAIN -M UL TIPL Y , 381  ex.
M A TRIX -C HAIN -O RDER , 378
matrix multiplication, 80 – 90 ,  1218
for all-pairs shortest paths, 648 – 655 ,  668 – 669
divide-and-conquer method for , 81 – 90 ,  770 – 775 ,  783  pr .
and LUP decomposition, 838  ex.
and matrix inversion, 834 – 837
Pan’ s method for , 89  ex.
parallel algorithm for , 770 – 775 ,  783  pr .
Strassen’ s algorithm for , 85 – 90 ,  124 – 125 ,  773 – 774
and transitive closure, 838  ex.
M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y , 81
M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y -R ECURSIVE , 83
matrix-vector multiplication, 762 – 765 ,  767 ,  1218
MAX-CNF satisfiability , 1 124  ex.
MAX-CUT problem, 1 124  ex.
M AX -F LOW -B Y -S CALING , 700  pr .
max-flow min-cut theorem, 684
max-heap, 162
building, 167 – 170
d -ary , 179  pr .
deletion from, 178  ex.
Page number: 1495
extracting the maximum key from, 174
in heapsort, 170 – 172
increasing a key in, 174 – 175
insertion into, 175
maximum key of, 174
as a max-priority queue, 172 – 178
mer geable, 268  n.
M AX -H EAP -D ECREASE -K EY , 176  ex.
M AX -H EAP -D ELETE , 178  ex.
M AX -H EAP -E XTRACT -M AX , 175
M AX -H EAPIFY , 165
M AX -H EAP -I NCREASE -K EY , 176
M AX -H EAP -I NSER T , 176
building a heap with, 178  pr .
M AX -H EAP -M AXIMUM , 175
max-heap property , 162
maintenance of, 164 – 167
maximal element, 1 160
maximal matching, 705 ,  1 108 ,  1 132  pr .
greedy method for , 726
maximization linear program, 853
maximum, 227
in binary search trees, 317 – 318
of a binomial distribution, 1202  ex.
finding, 228 – 229
in heaps, 174
in red-black trees, 334
M AXIMUM , 173 – 174 ,  250
maximum bipartite matching, 693 – 697 ,  705 – 716
maximum flow , 670 – 703
Edmonds-Karp algorithm for , 689 – 691
Ford-Fulkerson method for , 676 – 693
as a linear program, 862
and maximum bipartite matching, 693 – 697
push-relabel algorithms for , 702
scaling algorithm for , 699  pr .
updating, 699  pr .
maximum matching, 693 ,  704 ,  1 132  pr .
see also  maximum bipartite matching
maximum spanning tree, 1 134  pr .
max-priority queue, 173
MAX-3-CNF satisfiability , 1 120 – 1 121
M A YBE -MST -A, 602  pr .
M A YBE -MST -B, 602  pr .
M A YBE -MST -C, 602  pr .
mean
of a cluster , 1009
see also  expected value
mean weight of a cycle, 642  pr .
median, 227 – 247
Page number: 1496
weighted, 244  pr .
median key , of a B-tree node, 506
median-of-3 method, 203  pr .
member of a set ( ∈ ), 1 153
memoization, 368 ,  390 – 392
M EMOIZED -C UT -R OD , 369
M EMOIZED -C UT -R OD -A UX , 369
M EMOIZED -M A TRIX -C HAIN , 391
memory hierarchy , 27 ,  301
hash functions for , 304 – 307
M ERGE , 36
mer geable heap, 268  pr .
M ERGE -L ISTS , 1 125
mer ge sort, 34 – 44 ,  57
compared with insertion sort, 12 – 13 ,  15  ex.
lower bound for , 207
parallel algorithm for , 775 – 782
use of insertion sort in, 45  pr .
M ERGE -S OR T , 39
mer ging
of k  sorted lists, 178  ex.
lower bounds for , 222  pr .
parallel algorithm for , 776 – 780
of two sorted subarrays, 35 – 38
M ILLER -R ABIN , 946
Miller -Rabin primality test, 945 – 953
M IN -G AP , 495  ex.
min-heap, 163
analyzed by potential method, 459  ex.
building, 167 – 170
in constructing Huf fman codes, 436
d -ary , 668  pr .
in Dijkstra’ s algorithm, 623
in Johnson’ s algorithm, 666
mer geable, 268  n.
as a min-priority queue, 176  ex.
in Prim’ s algorithm, 597
M IN -H EAPIFY , 166  ex.
M IN -H EAP -I NSER T , 176  ex.
min-heap property , 163
maintenance of, 166  ex.
vs. binary-search-tree property , 315  ex.
minimization linear program, 853
minimizer of a function, 1022 ,  1024  fig.,  1026  fig.
minimum, 227
in binary search trees, 317 – 318
finding, 228 – 229
of fline, 541  pr .
in red-black trees, 334
M INIMUM , 173 ,  228 ,  250
Page number: 1497
minimum-cost circulation, 875  pr .
minimum-cost flow , 862 – 864
minimum-cost multicommodity flow , 866  ex.
minimum-cost spanning tree, see  minimum spanning tree
minimum cut, 682
global, 701  pr .
minimum degree, of a B-tree, 502
minimum mean-weight cycle, 642  pr .
minimum path cover , 698  pr .
minimum spanning tree, 585 – 603
in approximation algorithm for traveling-salesperson problem, 1 1 10
Bor ů vka’ s algorithm for , 603
on dynamic graphs, 599  ex.
generic method for , 586 – 591
Kruskal’ s algorithm for , 592 – 594
Prim’ s algorithm for , 594 – 597
second-best, 599  pr .
minimum-weight spanning tree, see  minimum spanning tree
minimum-weight vertex cover , 1 121 – 1 124
minor of a matrix, 1221
min-priority queue, 173
in constructing Huf fman codes, 434
in Dijkstra’ s algorithm, 623 – 624
in Prim’ s algorithm, 596 – 597
missing child, 1 173
mod, 64 ,  905
modeling, 851
modifying operation, 250
modular arithmetic, 64 ,  901  pr .,  916 – 923
modular equivalence (= (mod n )), 64 ,  905
modular exponentiation, 934 – 935
M ODULAR -E XPONENTIA TION , 935
modular linear equations, 924 – 928
M ODULAR -L INEAR -E QUA TION -S OL VER , 926
modulo, 64 ,  905
Monge array , 123  pr .
monotone sequence, 181
monotonically decreasing, 63
monotonically increasing, 63
Monty Hall problem, 1210  pr .
M OVE -T O -F RONT , 796 – 797
MST -K RUSKAL , 594
MST -P RIM , 596
MST -R EDUCE , 601  pr .
much-greater -than ( ≫ ), 533
much-less-than ( ≪ ), 761
multicommodity flow , 864 – 865
multicore computer , 748
multidimensional fast Fourier transform, 899  pr .
multigraph, 1 167
Page number: 1498
multiple, 904
of an element modulo n , 924 – 928
least common, 916  ex.
scalar , 1217
multiple sources and sinks, 674
multiplication
of complex numbers, 90  ex.
divide-and-conquer method for , 899  pr .
of matrices, see  matrix multiplication
of a matrix chain, 373 – 382
matrix-vector , 762 – 765 ,  767 ,  1218
modulo n  (· n ), 917
of polynomials, 878
multiplication method, 284 – 286
multiplicative group modulo n , 919
multiplicative inverse, modulo n , 927
multiplicative weights, 1015 – 1022
multiply instruction, 26
multiply-shift method, 285 – 286
M UL TIPOP , 450
multiset, 1 153  n.
dynamic, 460  ex.
mutually exclusive events, 1 185
mutually independent events, 1 188
mutually noninterfering strands, 767
ℕ  (set of natural numbers), 1 153
naive algorithm for string matching, 960 – 962
N AIVE -S TRING -M A TCHER , 960
National Resident Matching Program, 704 ,  722  ex.
natural cubic spline, 847  pr .
natural logarithm (ln), 66
natural numbers ( ℕ ), 1 153
keys interpreted as, 283 – 284
nearest-center rule, 1008
negative of a matrix, 1217
negative-weight cycle
and dif ference constraints, 629
and relaxation, 639  ex.
and shortest paths, 606 – 607 ,  614 – 615 ,  655  ex.,  662  ex.
negative-weight edges, 606 – 607
neighbor , 1 167
neighborhood, 715  ex.
nesting boxes, 640  pr .
net flow across a cut, 682
network
flow , see  flow network
residual, 677 – 681
for sorting, 789
new request, 810
Page number: 1499
Newton’ s method, 1038  pr .
NIL , 23
node, 1 172
see also  vertex
nondeterministic algorithm, 765
nondeterministic polynomial time, 1058  n.
see also  NP
nonempty suf fix, 997  pr .
nonhamiltonian graph, 1056
noninstance, 1051  n.
noninvertible matrix, 1220
nonnegativity constraint, 854
nonoblivious adversary , 807
nonoverlappable string pattern, 974  ex.
nonsample position, 997  pr .
nonsample suf fix, 997  pr .
nonsingular matrix, 1220
nontrivial power , 910  ex.
nontrivial square root of 1, modulo n , 934
no-path property , 61 1 ,  634
normal equation, 843
norm of a vector ( ∥  ∥ ), 1219
NOT function (¬), 1065
not a set member ( ∉ ), 1 153
not equivalent (≠ (mod n )), 64
NOT gate, 1065
NP (complexity class), 1043 ,  1058 ,  1060  ex.
NPC (complexity class), 1044 ,  1063
NP-complete, 1044 ,  1063
NP-completeness, 9 – 10 ,  1042 – 1 103
of the circuit-satisfiability problem, 1064 – 1071
of the clique problem, 1081 – 1084
of the formula-satisfiability problem, 1073 – 1076
of the graph-coloring problem, 1 100  pr .
of the half 3-CNF satisfiability problem, 1099  ex.
of the hamiltonian-cycle problem, 1085 – 1090
of the hamiltonian-path problem, 1098  ex.
of the independent-set problem, 1099  pr .
of integer linear programming, 1098  ex.
of the longest-simple-cycle problem, 1098  ex.
proving, of a language, 1072 – 1073
reduction strategies for , 1095 – 1098
of scheduling with profits and deadlines, 1 102  pr .
of the set-covering problem, 1 1 19  ex.
of the set-partition problem, 1098  ex.
of the subgraph-isomorphism problem, 1098  ex.
of the subset-sum problem, 1092 – 1095
of the 3-CNF-satisfiability problem, 1076 – 1079
of the traveling-salesperson problem, 1090 – 1092
of the vertex-cover problem, 1084 – 1085
Page number: 1500
of 0-1 integer programming, 1098  ex.
NP-hard, 1063
n -set, 1 156
n -tuple, 1 157
null event, 1 185
null tree, 1 173
null vector , 1221
number -field sieve, 956
numerical stability , 819 ,  821
n -vector , 1215
o -notation, 60
O -notation, 50 ,  54 – 55
O ′-notation, 73  pr .
-notation, 73  pr .
object, 23
objective function, 626 ,  852 ,  854
objective value, 854
oblivious adversary , 807
oblivious compare-exchange algorithm, 222  pr .
occurrence of a pattern, 957
of fline algorithm, 791
O FFLINE -M INIMUM , 542  pr .
of fline problem
caching, 440 – 446
lowest common ancestors, 543  pr .
minimum, 541  pr .
old request, 810
Omega-notation, 51 ,  54  fig.,  55 – 56
1-approximation algorithm, 1 105
one-pass method, 544
one-to-one correspondence, 1 163
one-to-one function, 1 162
online algorithm, 791 – 818
for caching, 802 – 815
for the cow-path problem, 815  pr .
for hiring, 150 – 152
for maintaining a linked list, 795 – 802
for task scheduling, 816  pr .
for waiting for an elevator , 792 – 794
online learning, 1003
O NLINE -M AXIMUM , 150
online task-parallel scheduler , 759
onto function, 1 162
open-address hash table, 293 – 301 ,  308  pr .
with double hashing, 295 – 297 ,  301  ex.
with linear probing, 297 ,  302 – 304
open interval (( a , b )), 1 157
OpenMP , 750
optimal assignment, 723 – 739
Page number: 1501
optimal binary search tree, 400 – 407
O PTIMAL -BST , 405
optimal objective value, 854
optimal solution, 854
optimal substructure, 382 – 387
of activity selection, 419
of binary search trees, 402 – 403
of the fractional knapsack problem, 429
in greedy method, 428
of Huf fman codes, 438
of longest common subsequences, 394 – 395
of matrix-chain multiplication, 376
of of fline caching, 441 – 442
of rod cutting, 365
of shortest paths, 605 – 606 ,  649 ,  655 – 656
of unweighted shortest paths, 385
of the 0-1 knapsack problem, 429
optimal vertex cover , 1 106
optimization problem, 362 ,  1045 ,  1049
approximation algorithms for , 1 104 – 1 136
and decision problems, 1045
OR function ( ∨ ), 659 ,  1065
order
of a group, 922
of growth, 32
linear , 1 160
partial, 1 160
total, 1 160
ordered pair , 1 156
ordered tree, 1 173
order statistics, 160 ,  227 – 247
dynamic, 480 – 486
order -statistic tree, 480 – 486
ord function, 987
OR gate, 1065
or , in pseudocode, 24
orthonormal, 849
OS-K EY -R ANK , 485  ex.
OS-R ANK , 483
OS-S ELECT , 482
outcome, 1 185
out-degree, 1 165
outer product, 1219
output
of an algorithm, 5
of a combinational circuit, 1066
of a logic gate, 1065
overdetermined system of linear equations, 821
overflow
of a queue, 257
Page number: 1502
of a stack, 255
overflowing vertex, 703
overlapping intervals, 489
finding all, 495  ex.
point of maximum overlap, 496  pr .
overlapping rectangles, 495  ex.
overlapping subproblems, 387 – 390
overlapping-suf fix lemma, 959
P (complexity class), 1043 ,  1050 ,  1054 ,  1055  ex.
page, in virtual memory , 440
pair
blocking, 716
ordered, 1 156
pairwise disjoint sets, 1 156
pairwise independence, 1 188
pairwise relatively prime, 908
palindrome, 407  pr .,  995  ex.
Pan’ s method for matrix multiplication, 89  ex.
parallel algorithm, 748 – 790
for computing Fibonacci numbers, 750 – 753
grain size in, 783  pr .
for LU decomposition, 784  pr .
for LUP decomposition, 784  pr .
for matrix inversion, 784  pr .
for matrix multiplication, 770 – 775 ,  783  pr .
for matrix-vector product, 762 – 765 ,  767
for mer ge sort, 775 – 782
for mer ging, 776 – 780
for prefix computation, 784  pr .
for quicksort, 789  pr .
randomized, 789  pr .
for reduction, 784  pr .
for a simple stencil calculation, 787  pr .
for solving systems of linear equations, 784  pr .
Strassen’ s algorithm, 773 – 774
for well-formed parentheses, 786  pr .
parallel computer , 10 ,  748 ,  756
parallel for , in pseudocode, 762 – 763
parallelism
logical, 753
of a randomized parallel algorithm, 789  pr .
spawning, 753
syncing, 754
of a task-parallel computation, 758
parallel keywords, 750 ,  752 ,  762
parallel loop, 762 – 765 ,  783  pr .
parallel-machine-scheduling problem, 1 133  pr .
parallel prefix, 784  pr .
parallel random-access machine, 789
Page number: 1503
parallel slackness, 758
rule of thumb, 761
parallel, strands logically in, 756
parallel trace, 754 – 756
series-parallel composition of, 762  fig.
parameter , 23
costs of passing, 120  pr .
parent
in a breadth-first tree ( π ), 555
in a parallel computation, 753
in a rooted tree, 1 172
P ARENT , 162
parenthesis theorem, 567
parenthesization of a matrix-chain product, 374
Pareto optimality , 722  ex.
parse tree, 1077
partial derivative (∂), 1023
partial order , 1 160
P AR TITION , 184
P AR TITION ′, 200  pr .
P AR TITION -A ROUND , 237
partition function, 363  n.
partitioning, 183 – 186
around median of 3 elements, 198  ex.
helpful, 232
Hoare’ s method for , 199  pr .
randomized, 192 ,  198  ex.,  200  pr .,  203  pr .
partition of a set, 1 156 ,  1 159
Pascal’ s triangle, 1 183  ex.
path, 1 165
alternating, 705
augmenting, 681 – 682 ,  705
critical, 619
find, 528
hamiltonian, 1060  ex.,  1098  ex.
longest, 385 ,  1042
shortest, see  shortest paths
simple, 1 165
weight of, 407  pr .,  604
P A TH, 1045 ,  1053
path compression, 528
path cover , 698  pr .
path length, of a tree, 328  pr .,  1 175  ex.
path-relaxation property , 61 1 ,  635
pattern, 957
nonoverlappable, 974  ex.
pattern matching, see  string matching
perfect hashing, 310
perfect linear speedup, 758
perfect matching, 715  ex.,  740  pr .
Page number: 1504
permutation, 1 163 ,  1 179 – 1 180
bit-reversal, 897
identity , 138  ex.
in place, 136
Josephus, 496  pr .
k -permutation, 136 ,  1 180
linear , 1224  pr .
random, 136 – 138
uniform random, 128 ,  136
permutation matrix, 1217
P ERMUTE -B Y -C YCLE , 139  ex.
P ERMUTE -W ITH -A LL , 139  ex.
P ERMUTE -W ITHOUT -I DENTITY , 138  ex.
persistent data structure, 355  pr .,  478
P ERSISTENT -T REE -I NSER T , 355  pr .
PER T chart, 617 ,  619  ex.
P-F IB , 753
phi function ( ϕ ( n )), 920
pivot
in LU decomposition, 826
in quicksort, 183
in selection, 230
P [: k ] (prefix of a pattern), 959
planar graph, 584  pr .
platter in a disk drive, 498
P-M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y , 771
P-M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y -R ECURSIVE , 772
P-M A T -V EC , 763
P-M A T -V EC -R ECURSIVE , 763
P-M A T -V EC -W RONG , 768
P-M ERGE , 779
P-M ERGE -A UX , 779
P-M ERGE -S OR T , 775
P-N AIVE -M ERGE -S OR T , 775
pointer , 23
trailing, 321
point, in clustering, 1006
point-value representation, 880
polylogarithmically bounded, 67
polynomial, 65 ,  877 – 885
addition of, 877
asymptotic behavior of, 71  pr .
coef ficient representation of, 879
derivatives of, 900  pr .
evaluation of, 46  pr .,  879 ,  884  ex.,  900  pr .
interpolation by , 880 ,  885  ex.
multiplication of, 878 ,  882 – 884 ,  899  pr .
point-value representation of, 880
polynomial-growth condition, 1 16 – 1 17
polynomially bounded, 65
Page number: 1505
polynomially related, 1051
polynomial-time acceptance, 1053
polynomial-time algorithm, 904 ,  1042
polynomial-time approximation scheme, 1 105
for maximum clique, 1 131  pr .
for subset sum, 1 124 – 1 130
polynomial-time computability , 1051
polynomial-time decision, 1053
polynomial-time reducibility (≤ P ), 1062 ,  1071  ex.
polynomial-time solvability , 1050
polynomial-time verification, 1056 – 1061
P OP , 255 ,  449
pop from a runtime stack, 202  pr .
positional tree, 1 174
positive-definite matrix, 1222
positive-semidefinite matrix, 1222
post-of fice location problem, 244  pr .
postorder tree walk, 314
potential function, 456
for lower bounds, 475
potential method, 456 – 460
for binary counters, 458 – 459
for disjoint-set data structures, 534 – 540 ,  541  ex.
for dynamic tables, 463 – 470
for maintaining a linked list, 799 – 801
for min-heaps, 459  ex.
for restructuring red-black trees, 473  pr .
for stack operations, 457 – 458
potential of a data structure, 456
power
of an element, modulo n , 932 – 936
k th, 910  ex.
nontrivial, 910  ex.
power series, 121  pr .
power set, 1 156
Pr { } (probability distribution), 1 185
PRAM, 789
predecessor
in binary search trees, 318 – 319
in breadth-first trees ( π ), 555
in linked lists, 259
in red-black trees, 334
in shortest-paths trees ( π ), 608
P REDECESSOR , 250
predecessor matrix, 647 ,  655  ex.,  657 – 659 ,  661  ex.
predecessor subgraph
in all-pairs shortest paths, 647
in breadth-first search, 561
in depth-first search, 564
in single-source shortest paths, 608
Page number: 1506
predecessor -subgraph property , 61 1 ,  637 – 638
prediction, 1004
prediction phase, 1003
preemption, 446  pr .,  816  pr .
prefix
of a sequence, 395
of a string ( ⊏ ), 959
prefix computation, 784  pr .
prefix-free code, 432
prefix function, 975 – 977
prefix-function iteration lemma, 980
preflow , 703
preimage of a matrix, 1224  pr .
preorder , total, 1 160
preorder tree walk, 314
Prim’ s algorithm, 594 – 597
with an adjacency matrix, 598  ex.
in approximation algorithm for traveling-salesperson problem, 1 1 10
with integer edge weights, 598  ex.
similarity to Dijkstra’ s algorithm, 624
for sparse graphs, 599  pr .
primality testing, 942 – 953 ,  956
Miller -Rabin test, 945 – 953
pseudoprimality testing, 944 – 945
primal linear program, 866
augmented, 870
primary clustering, 303
prime distribution function, 943
prime factorization of integers, 909
prime number , 905
density of, 943
prime number theorem, 943
primitive root of 
 , 932
principal root of unity , 886
principle of inclusion and exclusion, 1 158  ex.
P RINT -A LL -P AIRS -S HOR TEST -P A TH , 648
P RINT -C UT -R OD -S OLUTION , 372
P RINT -LCS, 397
P RINT -O PTIMAL -P ARENS , 381
P RINT -P A TH , 562
P RINT -S ET , 531  ex.
priority queue, 172 – 178
in constructing Huf fman codes, 434
in Dijkstra’ s algorithm, 623 – 624
heap implementation of, 172 – 178
max-priority queue, 173
min-priority queue, 173 ,  176  ex.
with monotone extractions, 181
in Prim’ s algorithm, 596 – 597
see also  Fibonacci heap
Page number: 1507
probabilistically checkable proof, 1 103 ,  1 136
probabilistic analysis, 127 – 128 ,  140 – 153
of approximation algorithm for MAX-3-CNF satisfiability , 1 120 – 1 121
and average inputs, 32
of average node depth in a randomly built binary search tree, 328  pr .
of balls and bins, 143 – 144
of birthday paradox, 140 – 143
of bucket sort, 216 – 218 ,  218  ex.
of collisions, 281  ex.
of file comparison, 967  ex.
of fuzzy sorting of intervals, 203  pr .
of hashing with chaining, 278 – 281
of hiring problem, 132 – 133 ,  150 – 152
of insertion into a binary search tree with equal keys, 327  pr .
of longest probe bound for hashing, 308  pr .
of lower bound for sorting, 219  pr .
of Miller -Rabin primality test, 948 – 953
of online hiring problem, 150 – 152
of open-address hashing, 297 – 300
and parallel algorithms, 789  pr .
of partitioning, 191  ex.,  198  ex.,  200  pr .,  203  pr .
of probabilistic counting, 153  pr .
of quicksort, 194 – 198 ,  200  pr .,  203  pr .
of Rabin-Karp algorithm, 965 – 966
and randomized algorithms, 134 – 136
of randomized online caching, 809 – 814
of randomized selection, 232 – 236 ,  245  pr .
of randomized weighted majority , 1022  ex.
of searching a sorted compact list, 269  pr .
of slot-size bound for chaining, 308  pr .
of sorting points by distance from origin, 218  ex.
of streaks, 144 – 150
of universal hashing, 286 – 290
probabilistic counting, 153  pr .
probability , 1 184 – 1 191
probability axioms, 1 185
probability density function, 1 191
probability distribution, 1 185
probability distribution function, 218  ex.
probe sequence, 293
probing, 293
see also  linear probing, double hashing
problem
abstract, 1048
computational, 5 – 6
concrete, 1049
decision, 1045 ,  1049
intractable, 1042
optimization, 362 ,  1045 ,  1049
solution to, 6 ,  1049
Page number: 1508
tractable, 1042
procedure, 18
calling, 23 ,  26 ,  29  n.
product (∏), 1 144
Cartesian (×), 1 157
inner , 1219
of matrices, see  matrix multiplication
outer , 1219
of polynomials, 878
rule of, 1 179
scalar flow , 675  ex.
professional wrestler , 563  ex.
program counter , 1068
programming, see  dynamic programming, linear programming
projection, 1032
proper ancestor , 1 172
proper descendant, 1 172
proper prefix, 959
proper subgroup, 921
proper subset ( ⊂ ), 1 154
proper suf fix, 959
P-S CAN -1, 785  pr .
P-S CAN -1-A UX , 785  pr .
P-S CAN -2, 786  pr .
P-S CAN -2-A UX , 786  pr .
P-S CAN -3, 787  pr .
P-S CAN -D OWN , 787  pr .
P-S CAN -U P , 787  pr .
pseudocode, 18 ,  21 – 24
pseudoinverse, 843
pseudoprime, 944 – 945
P SEUDOPRIME , 945
pseudorandom-number generator , 129
P-T RANSPOSE , 770  ex.
public key , 936 ,  939
public-key cryptosystem, 936 – 942
P USH , 255 ,  449
push onto a runtime stack, 202  pr .
push-relabel algorithms, 702
quadratic conver gence, 1039  pr .
quadratic function, 31
quadratic residue, 954  pr .
quantile, 242  ex.
query , 250
queue, 254 ,  256 – 257
in breadth-first search, 554
implemented by stacks, 258  ex.,  460  ex.
linked-list implementation of, 264  ex.
priority , see  priority queue
Page number: 1509
quicksort, 182 – 204
analysis of, 187 – 191 ,  193 – 198
average-case analysis of, 194 – 198
compared with insertion sort, 191  ex.
compared with radix sort, 214
with equal element values, 200  pr .
good worst-case implementation of, 241  ex.
with median-of-3 method, 203  pr .
parallel algorithm for , 789  pr .
randomized version of, 191 – 193 ,  200  pr .,  203  pr .
stack depth of, 202  pr .
and tail recursion, 202  pr .
use of insertion sort in, 198  ex.
worst-case analysis of, 193 – 194
Q UICKSOR T , 183
Q UICKSOR T ′, 200  pr .
quotient, 905
ℝ  (set of real numbers), 1 153
Rabin-Karp algorithm, 962 – 967
R ABIN -K ARP -M A TCHER , 966
race condition, 765 – 768
R ACE -E XAMPLE , 766
radix sort, 21 1 – 215
compared with quicksort, 214
in computing suf fix arrays, 992
R ADIX -S OR T , 213
radix tree, 327  pr .
RAM, 26 – 27
R ANDOM , 129
random-access machine, 26 – 27
parallel, 789
random hashing, 286 – 290
randomized algorithm, 128 – 129 ,  134 – 140
and average inputs, 32
comparison sort, 219  pr .
for fuzzy sorting of intervals, 203  pr .
for hiring problem, 135 – 136
for insertion into a binary search tree with equal keys, 327  pr .
for MAX-3-CNF satisfiability , 1 120 – 1 121
Miller -Rabin primality test, 945 – 953
for online caching, 807 – 814
parallel, 789  pr .
for partitioning, 192 ,  198  ex.,  200  pr .,  203  pr .
for permuting an array , 136 – 138
and probabilistic analysis, 134 – 136
quicksort, 191 – 193 ,  200  pr .,  203  pr .
random hashing, 286 – 290
randomized rounding, 1 136
for searching a sorted compact list, 269  pr .
Page number: 1510
for selection, 230 – 236 ,  245  pr .
universal hashing, 286 – 290
for weighted majority , 1022  ex.
R ANDOMIZED -H IRE -A SSIST ANT , 135
R ANDOMIZED -M ARKING , 808
R ANDOMIZED -P AR TITION , 192
R ANDOMIZED -P AR TITION ′, 200  pr .
R ANDOMIZED -Q UICKSOR T , 192
relation to randomly built binary search trees, 328  pr .
randomized rounding, 1 136
R ANDOMIZED -S ELECT , 230
randomly built binary search tree, 328  pr .
R ANDOML Y -P ERMUTE , 136 ,  138  ex.
random-number generator , 129
random oracle, 276
random permutation, 136 – 138
uniform, 128 ,  136
R ANDOM -S AMPLE , 139  ex.
R ANDOM -S EARCH , 154  pr .
random variable, 1 191 – 1 196
indicator , see  indicator random variable
range, 1 162
of a matrix, 1224  pr .
rank
column, 1220
in computing suf fix arrays, 987
full, 1220
of a matrix, 1220 ,  1224  pr .
of a node in a disjoint-set forest, 528 ,  533 – 534 ,  540  ex.
of a number in an ordered set, 480
in order -statistic trees, 482 – 484 ,  485 – 486  ex.
row , 1220
rate of growth, 32
RB-D ELETE , 348
RB-D ELETE -F IXUP , 351
RB-E NUMERA TE , 355  ex.
RB-I NSER T , 338
RB-I NSER T -F IXUP , 339
RB-J OIN , 356  pr .
RB-T RANSPLANT , 347
RC6, 304
reachability in a graph ( ↝ ), 1 165
real numbers ( ℝ ), 1 153
reconstructing an optimal solution, in dynamic programming, 390
record, 17 ,  157
rectangle, 495  ex.
R ECT ANGULAR -M A TRIX -M UL TIPL Y , 374
recurrence, 39 ,  76 – 80 ,  90 – 125
Akra-Bazzi, 1 15 – 1 19
algorithmic, 77 – 78
Page number: 1511
inequalities in, 78
master , 101
solution by Akra-Bazzi method, 1 17 – 1 18
solution by master method, 101 – 107
solution by recursion-tree method, 95 – 101
solution by substitution method, 90 – 95
recursion, 34
recursion tree, 42 ,  95 – 101
in matrix-chain multiplication analysis, 388 – 390
in mer ge sort analysis, 42 – 44
in proof of continuous master theorem, 108 – 1 10
in quicksort analysis, 188 – 190
in rod cutting analysis, 366 – 367
and the substitution method, 98
R ECURSIVE -A CTIVITY -S ELECT OR , 422
recursive case, 34
of a divide-and-conquer algorithm, 76
of a recurrence, 77
R ECURSIVE -M A TRIX -C HAIN , 389
red-black properties, 331 – 332
red-black tree, 331 – 359
augmentation of, 487 – 489
compared with B-trees, 497 ,  503
deletion from, 346 – 355
for enumerating keys in a range, 355  ex.
height of, 332
insertion into, 338 – 346
in interval trees, 490 – 495
joining of, 356  pr .
left-leaning, 358
maximum key of, 334
minimum key of, 334
in order -statistic trees, 480 – 486
persistent, 355  pr .
predecessor in, 334
properties of, 331 – 335
relaxed, 334  ex.
restructuring, 473  pr .
rotation in, 335 – 338
searching in, 334
successor in, 334
see also  interval tree, order -statistic tree
R EDUCE , 784  pr .
reducibility , 1061 – 1063
reduction algorithm, 1046 ,  1062
reduction function, 1062
reduction, of an array , 784  pr .
reduction strategies, 1095 – 1098
reference, 23
reflexive relation, 1 158
Page number: 1512
reflexivity of asymptotic notation, 61
region, feasible, 854
register , 301 ,  756
regret, 1016
regular graph, 716  ex.,  740  pr .
regularity condition, 103 ,  1 12 ,  1 14  ex.
regularization, 1012 ,  1036 – 1037
reindexing summations, 1 143 – 1 144
reinforcement learning, 1004
rejection
by an algorithm, 1053
by a finite automaton, 968
relation, 1 158 – 1 161
relatively prime, 908
R ELAX , 610
relaxation
of an edge, 609 – 61 1
linear programming, 1 122
relaxed red-black tree, 334  ex.
release time, 446  pr .,  816  pr .
remainder , 64 ,  905
remainder instruction, 26
repeated squaring
for all-pairs shortest paths, 652 – 653
for raising a number to a power , 934
r epeat , in pseudocode, 22
repetition factor , of a string, 996  pr .
R EPETITION -M A TCHER , 996  pr .
representative of a set, 520
R ESET , 456  ex.
residual capacity , 677 ,  681
residual edge, 678
residual network, 677 – 681
residue, 64 ,  905 ,  954  pr .
respecting a set of edges, 587
r eturn , in pseudocode, 24
return instruction, 26
reweighting
in all-pairs shortest paths, 662 – 664
in single-source shortest paths, 641  pr .
ρ ( n )-approximation algorithm, 1 104 ,  1 120
R IGHT , 162
right child, 1 173
right-conversion, 337  ex.
R IGHT -R OT A TE , 336
right rotation, 335
right shift ( ⋙ ), 285
right subtree, 1 173
rod cutting, 363 – 373 ,  393  ex.
root
Page number: 1513
of a tree, 1 171
of unity , 885 – 886
of 
 , 932
rooted tree, 1 171
representation of, 265 – 268
rotation, 335 – 338
rounding, 1 122
randomized, 1 136
row-major order , 253 ,  396
row rank, 1220
row vector , 1215
RSA public-key cryptosystem, 936 – 942
rule of product, 1 179
rule of sum, 1 178
running time, 29
asymptotic, 49
average-case, 32 ,  128
best-case, 34  ex.
expected, 32 ,  129
of a graph algorithm, 548
order of growth, 32
parallel, 757 – 758
and proper use of asymptotic notation, 56 – 57
rate of growth, 32
worst-case, 31
SA , see  suf fix array
sabermetrics, 415  n.
safe edge, 587
S AME -C OMPONENT , 522
sample position, 997  pr .
sample space, 1 185
sample suf fix, 997  pr .
sampling, 139  ex.
SA T , 1074
satellite data, 17 ,  157 ,  249
satisfiability , 1066 ,  1073 – 1079 ,  1 120 – 1 121 ,  1 124  ex.
satisfiable formula, 1043 ,  1074
satisfying assignment, 1066 ,  1074
scalar , 1217
scalar flow product, 675  ex.
scaling
in maximum flow , 699  pr .
in single-source shortest paths, 641  pr .
scan, 784  pr .
S CAN , 785  pr .
scapegoat tree, 358
schedule, 1 133  pr .
scheduler for task-parallel computations, 753 ,  759 – 761 ,  769  ex.,  789
scheduling, 446  pr .,  816  pr .,  1 102  pr .,  1 133  pr .
Page number: 1514
Schur complement, 825 ,  839
Schur complement lemma, 840
S CRAMBLE -S EARCH , 154  pr .
seam carving, 412  pr .
S EARCH , 250
searching
binary search, 44  ex.,  777 – 778
in binary search trees, 316 – 317
in B-trees, 504 – 505
in chained hash tables, 278
in direct-address tables, 274
for an exact interval, 495  ex.
in interval trees, 492 – 494
linear search, 25  ex.
in linked lists, 260
in open-address hash tables, 294
in red-black trees, 334
in sorted compact lists, 269  pr .
of static sets, 308  pr .
in an unsorted array , 154  pr .
search list, see  linked list
search tree, see  balanced search tree, binary search tree, B-tree, exponential search tree, interval tree,
optimal binary search tree, order -statistic tree, red-black tree, splay tree, 2-3 tree, 2-3-4 tree
secondary storage
search tree for , 497 – 519
stacks on, 517  pr .
second-best minimum spanning tree, 599  pr .
secret key , 936 ,  939
S ELECT , 237
used in quicksort, 241  ex.
S ELECT 3, 247  pr .
selection, 227
of activities, 418 – 425
and comparison sorts, 241
in order -statistic trees, 481 – 482
randomized, 230 – 236 ,  245  pr .
in worst-case linear time, 236 – 243
selection sort, 33  ex.,  53  ex.
selector vertex, 1087
self-loop, 1 164
semiconnected graph, 581  ex.
semiring, 651  n.,  669
sentinel
in linked lists, 261 – 264
in red-black trees, 332
sequence ( 〈  〉 ), 1 162
bitonic, 644  pr .
inversion in, 134  ex.,  486  ex.
probe, 293
sequential consistency , 756
Page number: 1515
serial algorithm versus parallel algorithm, 748
serial projection, 750 ,  753
series, 1 141 – 1 144
strands logically in, 756
series-parallel composition of parallel traces, 762  fig.
set ({ }), 1 153 – 1 158
cardinality (| |), 1 156
collection of, 1 156
convex, 675  ex.
dif ference (−), 1 154
independent, 1099  pr .
intersection (∩), 1 154
member ( ∈ ), 1 153
not a member ( ∉ ), 1 153
partially ordered, 1 160
static, 308  pr .
union ( ∪ ), 1 154
set-covering problem, 1 1 15 – 1 1 19
weighted, 1 132  pr .
set-partition problem, 1098  ex.
SHA-256, 291
shared memory , 748
sharks with lasers, 850
Shell’ s sort, 48
shift
left ( ⋘ ), 305
right ( ⋙ ), 285
in string matching, 957
shift instruction, 27
short-circuiting operator , 24
SHOR TEST -P A TH, 1045
shortest paths, 604 – 669
all-pairs, 605 ,  646 – 669
Bellman-Ford algorithm for , 612 – 616
with bitonic shortest paths, 644  pr .
and breadth-first search, 558 – 561 ,  605
conver gence property of, 61 1 ,  634 – 635
and cycles, 607 – 608
and dif ference constraints, 626 – 632
Dijkstra’ s algorithm for , 620 – 626
in a directed acyclic graph, 616 – 619
distance in ( δ ), 558
in ϵ -dense graphs, 668  pr .
estimate of, 609
Floyd-W arshall algorithm for , 655 – 659 ,  662  ex.
Gabow’ s scaling algorithm for , 641  pr .
Johnson’ s algorithm for , 662 – 667
as a linear program, 861
and longest paths, 1042
by matrix multiplication, 648 – 655 ,  668 – 669
Page number: 1516
and negative-weight cycles, 606 – 607 ,  614 – 615 ,  655  ex.,  662  ex.
with negative-weight edges, 606 – 607
no-path property of, 61 1 ,  634
optimal substructure of, 605 – 606 ,  649 ,  655 – 656
path-relaxation property of, 61 1 ,  635
predecessor in ( π ), 608
predecessor -subgraph property of, 61 1 ,  637 – 638
problem variants, 605
and relaxation, 609 – 61 1
by repeated squaring, 652 – 653
single-destination, 605
single-pair , 385 ,  605
single-source, 604 – 645
tree of, 608 – 609 ,  635 – 638
triangle inequality of, 61 1 ,  633
in an unweighted graph, 385 ,  558
upper -bound property of, 61 1 ,  633 – 634
in a weighted graph, 604
weight in ( δ ), 604
shortest remaining processing time (SRPT), 816  pr .
sibling, 1 172
signature, 938
simple cycle, 1 165 – 1 166
simple graph, 1 166
simple path, 1 165
longest, 385 ,  1042
S IMPLER -R ANDOMIZED -S ELECT , 243  pr .
simplex, 857
simplex algorithm, 626 ,  857 ,  876
simulation, 173 ,  181
single-destination shortest paths, 605
single-pair shortest path, 385 ,  605
as a linear program, 861
single-source shortest paths, 604 – 645
Bellman-Ford algorithm for , 612 – 616
with bitonic shortest paths, 644  pr .
and dif ference constraints, 626 – 632
Dijkstra’ s algorithm for , 620 – 626
in a directed acyclic graph, 616 – 619
in ϵ -dense graphs, 668  pr .
Gabow’ s scaling algorithm for , 641  pr .
and longest paths, 1042
singleton, 1 156
singly connected graph, 572  ex.
singly linked list, 259
singular matrix, 1220
singular value decomposition, 849
sink vertex, 553  ex.,  671 ,  674
size
of an algorithm’ s input, 28 ,  903 – 904 ,  1049 – 1052
Page number: 1517
of a boolean combinational circuit, 1067
of a clique, 1081
of a group, 917
of a set, 1 156
of a vertex cover , 1084 ,  1 106
skip list, 359
slackness
complementary , 873  pr .
parallel, 758
slot
of a direct-access table, 273
of a hash table, 275
S LOW -APSP , 652
smoothed analysis, 876
solution
to an abstract problem, 1049
to a computational problem, 6
to a concrete problem, 1049
feasible, 627 ,  854
infeasible, 854
optimal, 854
to a system of linear equations, 820
sorted linked list, 259
sorting, 5 ,  17 – 21 ,  34 – 44 ,  51 – 53 ,  56 – 57 ,  157 – 226 ,  775 – 782
bubblesort, 46  pr .
bucket sort, 215 – 219
columnsort, 222  pr .
comparison sort, 205
counting sort, 208 – 21 1
fuzzy , 203  pr .
heapsort, 161 – 181
in place, 158 ,  220  pr .
insertion sort, 12 – 13 ,  17 – 21 ,  51 – 53 ,  56 – 57
k -sorting, 221  pr .
lexicographic, 327  pr .,  986  n.
in linear time, 208 – 219 ,  220  pr .
lower bounds for , 205 – 208 ,  225
mer ge sort, 12 – 13 ,  34 – 44 ,  57 ,  775 – 782
by an oblivious compare-exchange algorithm, 222  pr .
parallel mer ge sort, 775 – 782
parallel quicksort, 789  pr .
probabilistic lower bound for , 219  pr .
quicksort, 182 – 204
radix sort, 21 1 – 215
selection sort, 33  ex.,  53  ex.
Shell’ s sort, 48
stable, 210
table of running times, 159
topological, 573 – 576
using a binary search tree, 326  ex.
Page number: 1518
with variable-length items, 220  pr .
0-1 sorting lemma, 222  pr .
sorting network, 789
source vertex, 554 ,  605 ,  671 ,  674
span, 757
span law , 758
spanning tree, 585
bottleneck, 601  pr .
maximum, 1 134  pr .
verification of, 603
see also  minimum spanning tree
sparse graph, 549
all-pairs shortest paths for , 662 – 667
and Prim’ s algorithm, 599  pr .
sparse matrix, 81
spawn , in pseudocode, 752 – 754
spawning, 753
speedup, 758
of a randomized parallel algorithm, 789  pr .
spindle in a disk drive, 498
spine of a string-matching automaton, 970
splay tree, 359 ,  478
splicing
in a binary search tree, 324 – 325
in a linked list, 260 – 261
spline, 847  pr .
splitting
of B-tree nodes, 506 – 508
of 2-3-4 trees, 518  pr .
splitting summations, 1 148 – 1 149
spurious hit, 965
square matrix, 1215
square of a directed graph, 553  ex.
square root, modulo a prime, 954  pr .
squaring, repeated
for all-pairs shortest paths, 652 – 653
for raising a number to a power , 934
SRPT (shortest remaining processing time), 816  pr .
stability
numerical, 819 ,  821
of sorting algorithms, 210
stable-marriage problem, 716 – 723
stable matching, 716
stable-roommates problem, 723  ex.
stack, 254 – 255
implemented by queues, 258  ex.
implemented with a priority queue, 178  ex.
linked-list implementation of, 264  ex.
operations analyzed by accounting method, 454 – 455
operations analyzed by aggregate analysis, 449 – 451
Page number: 1519
operations analyzed by potential method, 457 – 458
for procedure execution, 202  pr .
on secondary storage, 517  pr .
S T ACK -E MPTY , 255
standard deviation, 1 195
standard encoding ( 〈  〉 ), 1052
standard form of a linear program, 854
start state, 967
start time, 418
state of a finite automaton, 967
static graph, 522
static hashing, 282 ,  284 – 286
static set, 308  pr .
stencil, 787  pr .
Stirling’ s approximation, 67
stochastic gradient descent, 1040  pr .
S T OOGE -S OR T , 202  pr .
store instruction, 26 ,  756
strand, 754
mutually noninterfering, 767
Strassen’ s algorithm, 85 – 90 ,  124 – 125
parallel algorithm for , 773 – 774
streaks, 144 – 150 ,  153  ex.
streaming algorithms, 818
strict Fibonacci heap, 478
strictly decreasing, 63
strictly increasing, 63
string, 957 ,  1 179
interpreted as a key , 290 – 291 ,  292  ex.
string matching, 957 – 1002
based on repetition factors, 996  pr .
by finite automata, 967 – 975
with gap characters, 961  ex.,  975  ex.
Knuth-Morris-Pratt algorithm for , 975 – 985
naive algorithm for , 960 – 962
Rabin-Karp algorithm for , 962 – 967
by suf fix arrays, 985 – 996
string-matching automaton, 968 – 975
strongly connected component, 1 166
decomposition into, 576 – 581
S TRONGL Y -C ONNECTED -C OMPONENTS , 577
strongly connected graph, 1 166
subarray (:), 19 ,  23
subgraph, 1 166
equality , 724
predecessor , see  predecessor subgraph
subgraph-isomorphism problem, 1098  ex.
subgroup, 921 – 923
subpath, 1 165
subproblem graph, 370 – 371
Page number: 1520
subroutine, 23 ,  26 ,  29  n.
subsequence, 394
subset ( ⊆ ), 1 154 ,  1 156
SUBSET -SUM, 1092
subset-sum problem
approximation algorithm for , 1 124 – 1 130
NP-completeness of, 1092 – 1095
with unary tar get, 1098  ex.
substitution method, 90 – 95
in quicksort analysis, 191  ex.,  193 – 194
and recursion trees, 98
in selection analysis, 240 – 241
substring, 962 ,  1 179
rank of, 987
subtracting a low-order term, in the substitution method, 92 – 93
subtract instruction, 26
subtraction of matrices, 1218
subtree, 1 172
maintaining size of, in order -statistic trees, 484 – 485
success, in a Bernoulli trial, 1 196
successor
in binary search trees, 318 – 319
finding i th, of a node in an order -statistic tree, 486  ex.
in linked lists, 259
in red-black trees, 334
S UCCESSOR , 250
such that (:), 1 154
suf fix ( ⊐ ), 959
suf fix array ( SA ), 985 – 996 ,  997  pr .
suf fix function, 968
suf fix-function inequality , 971
suf fix-function recursion lemma, 972
sum (∑), 1 140
Cartesian, 885  ex.
of matrices, 1217
of polynomials, 877
rule of, 1 178
telescoping, 1 143
S UM -A RRA Y , 25  ex.
S UM -A RRA YS , 783  pr .
S UM -A RRA YS ′, 783  pr .
summation, 1 140 – 1 152
approximated by integrals, 1 150
in asymptotic notation, 58 ,  1 141
bounding, 1 145 – 1 152
formulas and properties of, 1 140 – 1 145
linearity of, 1 141
lower bounds on, 1 148 ,  1 150
splitting, 1 148 – 1 149
summation lemma, 887
Page number: 1521
supercomputer , 748
superpolynomial time, 1042
supersink, 674
supersource, 674
supervised learning, 1004
surjection, 1 162
SVD, 849
symbol table, 272
symmetric dif ference, 706
symmetric-key cryptosystem, 941
symmetric matrix, 1217
symmetric positive-definite matrix, 838 – 841
inverse of, 784  pr .
symmetric relation, 1 159
symmetry of Θ-notation, 61
sync , in pseudocode, 752 – 754
system of dif ference constraints, 626 – 632
system of linear equations, 784  pr .,  819 – 833 ,  847  pr .,  1034 – 1035
T ABLE -D ELETE , 467
T ABLE -I NSER T , 462
tail
of a binomial distribution, 1203 – 1210
of a linked list, 259
of a queue, 256
tail recursion, 202  pr .,  422
tar get, 1092
T arjan’ s of fline lowest-common-ancestors algorithm, 543  pr .
task parallelism, 749
see also  parallel algorithm
T ask Parallel Library , 750
task-parallel scheduling, 759 – 761 ,  769  ex.
task scheduling, 446  pr .,  816  pr .
tautology , 1060  ex.
T aylor series, 329  pr .
telescoping series, 1 143
telescoping sum, 1 143
termination of a loop invariant, 20
testing
of primality , 942 – 953 ,  956
of pseudoprimality , 944 – 945
text, 957
Theta-notation (Θ), 33 ,  51 ,  54  fig.,  56
thread, 748
Threading Building Blocks, 750
thread parallelism, 748
3-CNF , 1076
3-CNF-SA T , 1076
3-CNF satisfiability , 1076 – 1079
approximation algorithm for , 1 120 – 1 121
Page number: 1522
and 2-CNF satisfiability , 1043
3-COLOR, 1 100  pr .
3-conjunctive normal form, 1076
threshold constant, 77
tight bounds, 56
time, see  running time
time domain, 877
time-memory trade-of f, 367
timestamp, 564 ,  571  ex.
T [ i  :] (suf fix of a text), 986
T [: k ] (prefix of a text), 959
to , in pseudocode, 22
top-down method, for dynamic programming, 368
top of a stack, 254
topological sort, 573 – 576
in computing single-source shortest paths in a dag, 616
T OPOLOGICAL -S OR T , 573
total order , 1 160
total path length, 328  pr .
total preorder , 1 160
total relation, 1 160
tour
bitonic, 407  pr .
Euler , 583  pr .,  1043
of a graph, 1090
trace, 754 – 756
series-parallel composition of, 762  fig.
track in a disk drive, 498
tractability , 1042
trailing pointer , 321
training data, 1003
training phase, 1003
transition function, 967 ,  973 – 974
transitive closure, 659 – 661
and boolean matrix multiplication, 838  ex.
of dynamic graphs, 667  pr .,  669
T RANSITIVE -C LOSURE , 660
transitive relation, 1 159
transitivity of asymptotic notation, 61
T RANSPLANT , 324 ,  346
transpose
conjugate, 838  ex.
of a directed graph, 553  ex.
of a matrix, 1214
transpose symmetry of asymptotic notation, 62
traveling-salesperson problem
approximation algorithm for , 1 109 – 1 1 15
bitonic euclidean, 407  pr .
bottleneck, 1 1 15  ex.
NP-completeness of, 1090 – 1092
Page number: 1523
with the triangle inequality , 1 1 10 – 1 1 13
without the triangle inequality , 1 1 13 – 1 1 14
traversal of a tree, 314 ,  320  ex.,  1 1 12
treap, 358
tree, 1 169 – 1 176
AA-trees, 358
A VL, 357  pr .,  358
binary , see  binary tree
bisection of, 1 177  pr .
breadth-first, 555 ,  561
B-trees, 497 – 519
decision, 206 – 207 ,  219  pr .
depth-first, 564
diameter of, 563  ex.
dynamic, 478
free, 1 167 ,  1 169 – 1 171
full walk of, 1 1 12
fusion, 226 ,  478
heap, 161 – 181
height-balanced, 357  pr .
height of, 1 173
interval, 489 – 495
k -neighbor , 358
left-leaning red-black binary search trees, 358
minimum spanning, see  minimum spanning tree
optimal binary search, 400 – 407
order -statistic, 480 – 486
parse, 1077
recursion, 42 ,  95 – 101
red-black, see  red-black tree
rooted, 265 – 268 ,  1 171
scapegoat, 358
search, see  search tree
shortest-paths, 608 – 609 ,  635 – 638
spanning, see  minimum spanning tree, spanning tree
splay , 359 ,  478
treap, 358
2-3, 358 ,  519
2-3-4, 502 ,  518  pr .
van Emde Boas, 478
walk of, 314 ,  320  ex.,  1 1 12
weight-balanced trees, 358
T REE -D ELETE , 325 ,  326  ex.,  346 – 347
tree edge, 561 ,  564 ,  569
T REE -I NSER T , 321 ,  338
T REE -M AXIMUM , 318
T REE -M INIMUM , 318
T REE -P REDECESSOR , 319
T REE -S EARCH , 316
T REE -S UCCESSOR , 319
Page number: 1524
tree walk, 314 ,  320  ex.,  1 1 12
TRE-Q UICKSOR T , 202  pr .
trial division, 943
triangle inequality , 1 1 10
for shortest paths, 61 1 ,  633
triangular matrix, 1216
trichotomy , interval, 490
trichotomy property of real numbers, 62
tridiagonal linear systems, 847  pr .
tridiagonal matrix, 1216
trie (radix tree), 327  pr .
T RIM , 1 127
trimming a list, 1 126
trivial divisor , 904
tropical semiring, 651  n.
truth assignment, 1066 ,  1073
truth table, 1065
TSP , 1091
tuple, 1 157
twiddle factor , 891
2-CNF-SA T , 1080  ex.
2-CNF satisfiability , 1080  ex.
and 3-CNF satisfiability , 1043
two-pass method, 529
2-3-4 tree, 502 ,  518  pr .
2-3 tree, 358 ,  519
unary , 1050
unbounded competitive ratio, 804
unbounded linear program, 854
uncle, 340
unconditional branch instruction, 26
unconstrained gradient descent, 1023 – 1031
uncountable set, 1 156
underdetermined system of linear equations, 820
underflow
of a queue, 256
of a stack, 255
undirected graph, 1 164
articulation point of, 582  pr .
biconnected component of, 582  pr .
bridge of, 582  pr .
clique in, 1081
coloring of, 1 100  pr .,  1 176  pr .
computing a minimum spanning tree in, 585 – 603
d -regular , 716  ex.,  740  pr .
grid, 697  pr .
hamiltonian, 1056
independent set of, 1099  pr .
matching in, 693 – 697 ,  704 – 743
Page number: 1525
nonhamiltonian, 1056
vertex cover of, 1084 ,  1 106
see also  graph
undirected version of a directed graph, 1 167
uniform family of hash functions, 287
uniform hash function, 278
uniform hashing, 295
uniform probability distribution, 1 186 – 1 187
uniform random permutation, 128 ,  136
union
of languages, 1052
of linked lists, 264  ex.
of sets ( ∪ ), 1 154
U NION , 264  ex.,  521
disjoint-set-forest implementation of, 530
linked-list implementation of, 524 – 526
union by rank, 528
unit (1), 905
unit lower -triangular matrix, 1216
unit upper -triangular matrix, 1216
unit vector , 1215
universal family of hash functions, 286 – 287
universal hash function, 278
universal hashing, 286 – 290 ,  309  pr .
universal sink, 553  ex.
universe, 273 ,  1 155
unmatched vertex, 693 ,  705
unsorted linked list, 259
unstable matching, 717
unsupervised learning, 1004
until , in pseudocode, 22
unweighted longest simple paths, 385
unweighted shortest paths, 385
upper bound, 54
upper -bound property , 61 1 ,  633 – 634
upper median, 227
upper -triangular matrix, 1216
valid shift, 957
value
of a flow , 672
of a function, 1 161
objective, 854
V andermonde matrix, 881 ,  1223  pr .
van Emde Boas tree, 478
V ar [ ], see  variance
variable
decision, 851
in pseudocode, 22
random, 1 191 – 1 196
Page number: 1526
see also  indicator random variable
variable-length code, 432
variable-length input
interpreted as a key , 290 – 291
to the wee hash function, 306
variance, 1 194
of a binomial distribution, 1200
of a geometric distribution, 1 198
vector , 1215 ,  1219 – 1221
convolution of, 880
interpreted as a key , 290 – 291
orthonormal, 849
V enn diagram, 1 155
verification, 1056 – 1061
of spanning trees, 603
verification algorithm, 1058
vertex
articulation point, 582  pr .
attributes of, 552
capacity of, 676  ex.
in a graph, 1 164
intermediate, 655
isolated, 1 165
matched, 693 ,  705
selector , 1087
unmatched, 693 ,  705
vertex cover , 1084 ,  1 106
VER TEX-COVER, 1084
vertex-cover problem
approximation algorithm for , 1 106 – 1 109 ,  1 121 – 1 124
NP-completeness of, 1084 – 1085
vertex labeling, 724 ,  742  pr .
vertex set, 1 164
virtual memory , 27
V iterbi algorithm, 41 1  pr .
walk of a tree, 314 ,  320  ex.,  1 1 12
W AR (wins above replacement), 414  pr .
watershed function, 103
weak duality , 868 – 869 ,  874  pr .
weak Pareto optimality , 722  ex.
W EE , 307
wee hash function, 305 – 307
weight
of a cut, 1 124  ex.
of an edge, 551
mean, 642  pr .
of a path, 407  pr .,  604
of a shortest path ( δ ), 604
of a spanning tree, 585
Page number: 1527
weight-balanced tree, 358 ,  472  pr .
W EIGHTED -M AJORITY , 1018 ,  1022  ex.
weighted median, 244  pr .
weighted set-covering problem, 1 132  pr .
weighted-union heuristic, 525
weighted vertex cover , 1 121 – 1 124
weight function, 551
well-defined recurrence, 77
while , in pseudocode, 22
white-path theorem, 568
white vertex, 554 ,  564
widest augmenting path, 700  pr .
wins above replacement (W AR), 414  pr .
wire, 1065
W ITNESS , 946
witness to the compositeness of a number , 946
work, 757
work law , 757
work-stealing scheduling algorithm, 790
worst-case running time, 31
X 10 ,  750
Y en’ s improvement to the Bellman-Ford algorithm, 640  pr .
Y oung tableau, 179  pr .
ℤ  (set of integers), 1 153
ℤ n  (equivalence classes modulo n ), 905
 (elements of multiplicative group modulo n ), 919
 (nonzero elements of ℤ n ), 944
zero matrix, 1215
zero of a polynomial modulo a prime, 928  ex.
0-1 integer programming, 1098  ex.,  1 121
0-1 knapsack problem, 428 ,  430  ex.,  1 134  pr .
0-1 sorting lemma, 222  pr .
zombie apocalypse, 850